
Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original 137 illustrations.
      See 41702-h.htm or 41702-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/41702/41702-h/41702-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/41702/41702-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Text enclosed by equal signs is in bold face (=bold=).





TREES OF INDIANA

(First Revised Edition)

by

CHAS. C. DEAM







April, 1921

Fort Wayne Printing Company
Contractors for Indiana State Printing and Binding
Fort Wayne, Indiana
1921

The Department of Conservation
State of Indiana
W. A. Guthrie, Chairman.
Stanley Coulter.
John W. Holtzman.
E. M. Wilson, Secretary.

Publication No. 13

Richard Lieber.
Director.


[Illustration: Plate 1.

SYCAMORE NEAR WORTHINGTON. IND., THE LARGEST BROAD-LEAVED TREE IN THE
U. S. FIVE FEET ABOVE THE GROUND IT IS 42 FT. 3 IN. IN CIRC.; THE EAST
BRANCH IS 27 FT. 3 IN. IN CIRC. AND THE WEST BRANCH IS 23 FT. 2 IN.
IN CIRC. SEE JOUR. HEREDITY, VOL. 6:407:1915.]




Preface


The first edition of Deam's "Trees of Indiana" was published in 1911.
By limiting the distribution, the edition of 10,000 lasted about three
years. The demand for a book of this kind was so great that a second
edition of 1,000 copies was published in March 1919. This edition was
exhausted within five days after its publication was announced, and
thousands of requests for it could not be filled. These came from all
classes of people, but the greatest demand was from the school teachers
of the State.

Since forestry is an integral part of agriculture which is now taught in
our public schools, and since a book on the trees of the State is in
demand, the Conservation Commission has authorized a revised edition of
"The Trees of Indiana." What was formerly Bulletin No. 3 of the Division
of Forestry is now published as Publication No. 13 of the Department.
The reader's attention is called to a new departure in illustrations,
which were made from photographic reproductions of specimens in Mr.
Deam's herbarium. The photographs were taken by Mr. Harry F. Dietz of
the Division of Entomology. It is believed that it will be gratefully
received by the public and will stimulate an interest in forestry that
should achieve practical results.

  RICHARD LIEBER,
  Director, The Department of Conservation.




Table of Contents.


  Preface                                                       7

  List of illustrations                                        10

  Introduction                                                 13

  Key to families                                              17

  Trees of Indiana                                             19

  Excluded Species                                            290

  Measurements of some large trees that grow in Indiana       297

  Specific gravity of Indiana woods                           299

  Index                                                       305




Illustrations.


  PLATE NUMBER              PLATES                                  PAGE

      1. Frontispiece; Sycamore, largest hardwood tree in U.S.         5
      2. Pinus Strobus (White Pine)                                   21
      3. Pinus Banksiana (Gray or Jack Pine)                          23
      4. Pinus virginiana (Scrub Pine)                                24
      5. Larix laricina (Tamarack)                                    27
      6. Tsuga canadensis (Hemlock)                                   29
      7. Taxodium distichum (Cypress)                                 31
      8. Thuja occidentalis (Arbor-Vitæ)                              33
      9. Juniperus virginiana (Red Cedar)                             35
     10. Salix nigra (Black Willow)                                   37
     11. Salix amygdaloides (Peach-leaved Willow)                     39
     12. Salix alba (White Willow)                                    41
     13. Salix fragilis (Crack Willow)                                42
     14. Salix discolor (Pussy Willow)                                44
     15. Populus alba (Silver-leaf Poplar)                            46
     16. Populus heterophylla (Swamp Cottonwood)                      48
     17. Populus deltoides (Cottonwood)                               49
     18. Populus grandidentata (Large-toothed Aspen)                  51
     19. Populus tremuloides (Quaking Aspen)                          53
     20. Juglans cinerea (Butternut)                                  55
     21. Juglans nigra (Black Walnut)                                 57
     22. Carya illinoensis (Pecan)                                    60
     23. Carya cordiformis (Pignut Hickory)                           62
     24. Carya ovata (Shellbark Hickory)                              64
     25. Carya laciniosa (Big Shellbark Hickory)                      67
     26. Carya alba (White Hickory)                                   69
     27. Carya glabra (Black Hickory)                                 71
     28. Carya ovalis (Small-fruited Hickory)                         73
     29. Carya Buckleyi var. arkansana                                77
     30. Carpinus caroliniana (Water Beech)                           79
     31. Ostrya virginiana (Ironwood)                                 81
     32. Betula lutea (Yellow Birch)                                  83
     33. Betula populifolia (Gray or White Birch)                     86
     34. Betula papyrifera (Paper or Canoe Birch)                     87
     35. Betula nigra (Black or Red Birch)                            89
     36. Alnus incana (Speckled Alder)                                91
     37. Alnus rugosa (Smooth Alder)                                  93
     38. Fagus grandifolia (Beech)                                    95
     39. Castanea dentata (Chestnut)                                  97
     40. Quercus alba (White Oak)                                    102
     41. Quercus bicolor (Swamp White Oak)                           105
     42. Quercus Muhlenbergii (Chinquapin Oak)                       106
     43. Quercus Michauxii (Cow or Basket Oak)                       108
     44. Quercus Prinus (Chestnut Oak)                               111
     45. Quercus stellata (Post Oak)                                 113
     46. Quercus macrocarpa (Bur Oak)                                115
     47. Quercus lyrata (Overcup Oak)                                118
     48. Quercus imbricaria (Shingle Oak)                            120
     49. Quercus rubra (Red Oak)                                     122
     50. Quercus palustris (Pin Oak)                                 124
     51. Quercus Schneckii (Schneck's Red Oak)                       125
     52. Quercus ellipsoidalis (Hill's Oak)                          128
     53. Quercus velutina (Black Oak)                                129
     54. Quercus coccinea (Scarlet Oak)                              132
     55. Quercus falcata (Spanish Oak)                               134
     56. Quercus marilandica (Black Jack Oak)                        136
     57. Ulmus fulva (Slippery or Red Elm)                           139
     58. Ulmus americana (White Elm)                                 141
     59. Ulmus Thomasi (Hickory or Rock Elm)                         143
     60. Ulmus alata (Winged Elm)                                    144
     61. Celtis occidentalis (Hackberry)                             147
     62. Celtis pumila var. Deamii (Dwarf Hackberry)                 149
     63. Celtis mississippiensis (Sugarberry)                        152
     64. Morus rubra (Red Mulberry)                                  154
     65. Maclura pomifera (Osage Orange)                             156
     66. Magnolia acuminata (Cucumber Tree)                          158
     67. Liriodendron Tulipifera (Tulip Tree or Yellow Poplar)       160
     68. Asimina triloba (Pawpaw)                                    162
     69. Sassafras officinale (Sassafras)                            164
     70. Liquidambar Styraciflua (Sweet Gum)                         167
     71. Platanus occidentalis (Sycamore)                            169
     72. Malus glaucescens (American Crab Apple)                     173
     73. Malus lancifolia (Narrow-leaved Crab Apple)                 175
     74. Malus ioensis (Western Crab Apple)                          176
     75. Amelanchier canadensis (Juneberry or Service Berry)         178
     76. Amelanchier lævis (Smooth Juneberry or Service Berry)       179
     77. Cratægus Crus-galli (Cock-spur Thorn)                       183
     78. Cratægus cuneiformis (Marshall's Thorn)                     184
     79. Cratægus punctata (Large-fruited Thorn)                     186
     80. Cratægus Margaretta (Judge Brown's Thorn)                   187
     81. Cratægus collina (Chapman's Hill Thorn)                     189
     82. Cratægus succulenta (Long-spined Thorn)                     190
     83. Cratægus neo-fluvialis (New River Thorn)                    192
     84. Cratægus Calpodendron (Pear Thorn)                          193
     85. Cratægus chrysocarpa (Round-leaved Thorn)                   195
     86. Cratægus viridis (Southern Thorn)                           196
     87. Cratægus nitida (Shining Thorn)                             198
     88. Cratægus macrosperma (Variable Thorn)                       199
     89. Cratægus basilica (Edson's Thorn)                           201
     90. Cratægus Jesupi (Jesup's Thorn)                             202
     91. Cratægus rugosa (Fretz's Thorn)                             204
     92. Cratægus filipes (Miss Beckwith's Thorn)                    205
     93. Cratægus Gattingeri (Gattinger's Thorn)                     207
     94. Cratægus pruinosa (Waxy-fruited Thorn)                      208
     95. Cratægus coccinoides (Eggert's Thorn)                       210
     96. Cratægus coccinea (Scarlet Thorn)                           211
     97. Cratægus mollis (Red-fruited or Downy Thorn)                213
     98. Cratægus Phænopyrum (Washington's Thorn)                    215
     99. Prunus americana (Wild Red Plum)                            217
    100. Prunus americana var. lanata (Woolly-leaf Plum)             219
    101. Prunus nigra (Canada Plum)                                  220
    102. Prunus hortulana (Wild Goose Plum)                          222
    103. Prunus pennsylvanica (Wild Red Cherry)                      224
    104. Prunus serotina (Wild Black Cherry)                         225
    105. Cercis canadensis (Redbud)                                  228
    106. Gleditsia triacanthos (Honey Locust)                        229
    107. Gleditsia aquatica (Water Honey Locust)                     231
    108. Gymnocladus dioica (Coffeenut Tree)                         234
    109. Robinia Pseudo-Acacia (Black Locust)                        236
    110. Ailanthus altissima (Ailanthus or Tree of Heaven)           238
    111. Acer Negundo (Box Elder)                                    241
    112. Acer saccharinum (Silver Maple)                             243
    113. Acer rubrum (Red Maple)                                     245
    114. Acer nigrum (Black Maple)                                   247
    115. Acer saccharum (Sugar Maple)                                249
    116. Æsculus glabra (Buckeye)                                    252
    117. Æsculus octandra (Sweet Buckeye)                            254
    118. Tilia glabra (Linn or Basswood)                             256
    119. Tilia heterophylla (White Basswood)                         258
    120. Nyssa sylvatica (Black Gum)                                 260
    121. Cornus florida (Dogwood)                                    262
    122. Oxydendrum arboreum (Sour Wood or Sorrel Tree)              264
    123. Diospyros virginiana (Persimmon)                            266
    124. Fraxinus americana (White Ash)                              269
    125. Fraxinus biltmoreana (Biltmore Ash)                         271
    126. Fraxinus lanceolata (Green Ash)                             273
    127. Fraxinus pennsylvanica (Red Ash)                            275
    128. Fraxinus profunda (Pumpkin Ash)                             277
    129. Fraxinus quadrangulata (Blue Ash)                           279
    130. Fraxinus nigra (Black Ash)                                  281
    131. Adelia acuminata (Pond Brush or Crooked Brush)              283
    132. Catalpa bignonioides (Catalpa)                              285
    133. Catalpa speciosa (Hardy Catalpa)                            286
    134. Viburnum prunifolium (Black Haw)                            289
    135. County Map of Indiana                                       301
    136. Map showing certain areas of forest distribution            302
    137. English and Metric Scales compared                          303




Trees of Indiana




_INTRODUCTION_


The present edition has been entirely rewritten. While the general plan
of the first edition has been followed, some changes have been made.

The number of trees included has been wholly arbitrary. All woody plants
of the State which generally attain a maximum diameter of 10 cm. (4
inches) at breast high are regarded as tree forms. _Alnus rugosa_ which
so closely resembles _Alnus incana_, is an exception, and a description
of it is given to aid in the identification of our tree form of _Alnus_.
Also several species of Cratægus are included which commonly do not
attain tree size. The species of all Cratægus begin to flower and fruit
many years before they attain their maximum size. The genus is much in
need of study, and the smaller forms are included to stimulate a study
of the genus, and in order that the larger forms may be more easily and
certainly identified.

The number of introduced trees has been limited to those that more or
less freely escape at least in some parts of the State. The one
exception is _Catalpa bignonioides_, which is given to help separate it
from our native catalpa, both of which are now commonly planted.

=Botanic Description.=--The botanic descriptions have been made from
specimens collected in Indiana. In most instances the material has been
quite ample, and collected from all parts of the State. Technical terms
have been avoided, and only when precision and accuracy were necessary
have a few been used which can be found in any school dictionary. The
length of the description varies in proportion to the importance and
interest of the species and the number of characters necessary to
separate it from other forms. The characters used are those which are
the most conspicuous, and are generally with the specimen at hand. In
most instances mature leaves are at hand, and these are most fully
described. When leaves are discussed, only mature and normal leaves are
considered. The descriptions are not drawn to include the leaf forms,
and sizes of coppice shoots or seedlings. Measurements of simple leaves
do not include the petiole unless mentioned.

When the term twig is used, it means the growth of the year. Branchlets
and branches mean all growth except the present year. By seasons are
meant the calendar seasons.

The size of trees is designated as small, medium and large. These terms
are defined as follows: Small trees are those that attain a diameter of
2 dm.; medium-sized trees are those whose maximum diameter is between 2
dm. and 6 dm.; large-sized trees are those which are commonly more than
6 dm. in diameter. Diameter measurements are at 14 dm. (4-1/2) feet
above the ground, or breast high.

The common names given are those most generally used in our area. Where
common names are rarely applied to our forms, the common commercial or
botanical common name is given. In some instances where a tree is known
by several names, one or more of which are often applied to a related
species, the liberty has been taken to select a common name which should
be restricted to the one species.

Botanical names are usually pronounced according to the English method
of pronouncing Latin. The accented syllables have been marked as
follows: the grave (\) accent to indicate the long English sound of the
vowel and the acute (/) accent to show the short or otherwise modified
sound.

Measurements have been given in the metric system, and in some instances
the English equivalent has also been given.

The nomenclature attempted is that of the International Code. The
sequence of families is that of Gray's Manual, 7th Edition.

=Distribution.=--The general distribution of the species is first given,
which is followed by the distribution in Indiana. The general
distribution has been obtained by freely consulting all the local floras
and general works on botany. The Indiana distribution has been obtained
for the greater part from specimens represented in the writer's
herbarium and from notes in doing field work during the past 24 years.
Since the first edition of the "Trees of Indiana" was published the
writer has traveled over 27,000 miles in Indiana, via auto, making a
special study of the flora of the State, and has visited every county
and has traversed practically every township in the State. In discussing
numbers in distribution it was decided to use terms already in common
use, but to assign a definite meaning to each as follows: Very common
means more than 25 trees to the acre; common, 5-25 trees to the acre;
frequent 1-5 trees to the acre; infrequent, 1 tree to 2-10 acres; rare,
1 tree to every 11-100 acres; very rare, 1 tree to more than 100 acres;
local when the distribution is circumscribed or in spots.

Where a species has the limit of its range in our area, its distribution
is sometimes given at length for scientific reasons. It should be
remembered that some of the older records of distribution were made by
geologists or inexperienced botanists, and when such records are
questioned it is done with a spirit of scientific accuracy. Some of our
early authors did not distinguish between cultivated and native trees,
which involves the distribution of certain species.

The habitat of many species is discussed; which suggests forestal,
horticultural and ornamental possibilities. Then too, the habitat of a
tree, helps to identify it. When associated trees are given, those are
enumerated which are characteristic of the species throughout its range
in our area and they are arranged in the order of their abundance.

A county map of the State is included which will assist in finding the
range of each species. A forestal area map is also added to visualize
certain habitats of the State.

The range and distribution of the species in the State has been given
considerable attention to encourage investigation along this line.

=Remarks.=--Under this title the economic uses of the trees and their
products have been given. In addition horticultural and unclassified
information is included.

=Illustrations.=--All of the illustrations except two are photographic
reproductions of specimens in the writer's herbarium. The two drawings
were used in the first edition.

About 20 of the photographs were made by Paul Ulman, and the remainder
by Harry F. Dietz, who has laboriously tried to obtain good
reproductions from the material at hand.

=Explanation of Map of Certain Forestal Areas.=--In describing the
distribution of certain species of trees within the State, it was found
convenient to speak of certain forestal areas which are here described,
and are illustrated by a map which may be found at the end of the text.

_Lake Region_:--The southernmost lakes in Indiana are those located in
the southwestern part of Wells County; Lake Galacia about five miles
northeast of Fairmount in Grant County; Lake Cicott in Cass County; and
Kate's Pond about 1-1/2 miles northwest of Independence in Warren
County. Roughly estimated, all of Indiana north of a line connecting
these lakes might be considered the lake area of the State. _Prairie
Area_:--While the interior of Indiana has quite a few small areas called
prairies, the real western prairie did not extend far into the State.
The dividing line is very irregular, and several elongated lobes
extended farther east than indicated by the map. The larger areas east
of the line were the extensive prairie area of the Kankakee Valley; the
northern part of Pulaski County; and parts of White and Tippecanoe
Counties. _"Knob" Area_:--This is the hilliest part of the State and is
located in the southcentral part. It is contained in the unglaciated
portion of the State, and includes the "knobs" of the Knobstone, Chester
and Mansfield sandstone areas of Indiana. In this area are included the
scrub pine and chestnut oak, with one exception; sorrel tree and the
chestnut, with two possible exceptions. _The Flats_:--This is a level
stretch of country, here and there deeply eroded. Being level, and the
soil a fine compact clay, the drainage is poor which suggested the local
name "flats." _The Lower Wabash Valley_:--This is part of Knox, Gibson
and Posey Counties which is usually inundated each year by the Wabash
River.

=Acknowledgments.=--The character and qualities of the wood have for the
greater part been taken from the works of Britton and Brown, Hough, and
Sargent, to whom indebtedness is acknowledged.

The _Salicaceæ_, except the genus _Populus_ was written by C. R. Ball,
of the Bureau of Plant Industry, Washington, D. C. The _Malaceæ_ was
contributed by W. W. Eggleston, also of the Bureau of Plant Industry,
Washington, D. C. These authors were asked to make their part conform to
the general plan of the book. Mr. Ball and Mr. Eggleston are recognized
authorities on the respective parts they have written and users of this
book will appreciate the value of having these difficult parts written
by our best authorities. The author wishes to gratefully acknowledge
this great favor.

The most grateful acknowledgement is given to Prof. Stanley Coulter,
Dean, School Science, Purdue University, who has read all of the
manuscript and made valuable suggestions, corrections and criticisms.

I wish to acknowledge the assistance of Stella M. Deam, my wife, in
field and clerical work.

I wish to thank the Department of Conservation for the opportunity of
doing this work.




Key to the Families.


                                                                      PAGE

  Leaves linear or scale-like.                          Pinaceæ         19

  Leaves not as above.

    A. Leaves compound.

      Leaves palmately compound.                        Æsculaceæ      251

        Leaves without an odd leaflet at the end.       Cæsalpinaceæ   226

        Leaves with an odd leaflet at the end.

          Leaves alternate.

            Leaflets toothed all around.                Juglandaceæ     52

            Leaflets entire, or with 1-4 teeth near
                the base.

              Trees with thorns, leaflets entire,
                  generally less than 4 cm.
                  (1-1/2 inches) long.                  Fabaceæ        233

              Trees without thorns, leaflets entire
                  or with 1-4 teeth near the base,
                  generally longer than 4 cm.
                  (1-1/2 inches).                       Simarubaceæ    237

          Leaves opposite.

            Leaflets 3-5, fruit in pairs.               Aceraceæ       239

            Leaflets 5-11, fruit single.                Oleaceæ        267

    A. Leaves simple.

      Leaves opposite or whorled.

        Petioles more than 4 cm. (1-1/2 inches) long.

          Blades palmately 3-5 lobed.                   Aceraceæ       239

          Blades entire or with 1 or 2 lateral lobes.   Bignoniaceæ    284

        Petioles less than 4 cm. (1-1/2 inches) long.

          Flowers 4-parted, stone of fruit round.       Cornaceæ       259

          Flowers 5-parted, stone of fruit flattened.   Caprifoliaceæ  288

      Leaves alternate.

        B. Leaves entire.

          Trees with thorns and a milky sap.            Maclura in
                                                          Moraceæ      155

          Trees without thorns, sap not milky.

            Leaves 3-5 nerved at the base.

              Leaves 3-nerved at the base.              Celtis in
                                                          Ulmaceæ      146

              Leaves 5-nerved at the base.              Cercis in
                                                          Cæsalpinaceæ 227

            Leaves with 1 primary nerve.

              Leaves usually more than 1.5 dm.
                  (6 inches) long, flowers solitary.

                Flowers appearing before or with the
                    leaves.                             Anonaceæ       161

                Flowers appearing after the leaves.     Magnoliaceæ    155

            Leaves less than 1.5 dm. (6 inches) long,
                flowers in clusters.

              Bark and leaves aromatic                  Lauraceæ       163

              Bark and leaves not aromatic.
                Fruit dry, an acorn                     Quercus
                                                          imbricaria
                                                          in Fagaceæ   119

                Fruit fleshy.

                  Fruit with one seed, stone
                      cylindrical                       Nyssa in
                                                          Cornaceæ     259

                  Fruit with more than one seed,
                      rarely one, seeds flat            Ebenaceæ       265

    B. Leaves finely serrate, coarsely toothed
           or lobed.

      C. Leaves with one primary vein.

      Bark and leaves aromatic                          Lauraceæ       163

      Bark and leaves not aromatic.

        Staminate and pistillate flowers and fruit in
            catkins.

          Scales of winter buds 2, ovary many-seeded,
              seeds with a tuft of hairs at the summit  Salix in
                                                          Salicaceæ     34

          Scales of winter buds more than 2, ovary
              1-seeded, seeds without a tuft of hairs
              at the summit                             Betulaceæ       78

        Staminate and pistillate flowers and fruit not
            in catkins.

          Fruit dry.

            Fruit a samara                              Ulmus
                                                          in Ulmaceæ   137

            Fruit not a samara

              Bark smooth; fruit spiny                  Fagaceæ         92

              Bark furrowed; fruit a smooth capsule     Ericaceæ       263

          Fruit fleshy.

            Flowers more than 8 mm. (1/3 inch) broad,
                fruit edible, apple-like.

              Trees mostly with thorns, fruit with
                  remnant of calyx at apex of fruit,
                  normally with more than 1 seed.       Malaceæ        171

              Trees without thorns, fruit with no
                  remnant of calyx at the apex, fruit
                  a 1-seeded edible drupe.              Amygdalaceæ    216

            Flowers less than 8 mm. (1/3 inch) across,
                fruit a non-edible drupe                Cornaceæ       259

    C. Leaves with more than 1 primary vein.

      Staminate and pistillate flowers in catkins.

        Fruit dry                                       Populus in
                                                          Salicaceæ     45

        Fruit fleshy                                    Morus in
                                                          Moraceæ      151

      Staminate and pistillate flowers not in catkins.

        Pistillate and staminate flowers separate.

          Leaves 3-nerved at the base, fruit a
              1-seeded drupe                            Celtis in
                                                          Ulmaceæ      146

          Leaves 5-nerved at the base, fruit a head of
              carpels or achenes.

            Bark fissured, not peeling off in flakes,
                leaves aromatic                         Altingiaceæ    166

            Bark peeling off in flakes, leaves not
                aromatic                                Platanaceæ     168

      Pistillate and staminate flowers in one.

        Fruit dry                                       Tiliaceæ       255

        Fruit fleshy                                    Malaceæ        171




=PINÀCEAE.= The Pine Family.


Trees and shrubs with a resinous sap, which yields rosin, tar,
turpentine and essential oils. The leaves are linear or scale-like,
alternate, whorled or clustered; flowers naked, appearing in the spring;
fruit a cone or sometimes berry-like. A large family of trees and
shrubs, containing over 200 species, found in many parts of the world,
and of great economic importance. In Indiana only nine species are
native, and the distribution of seven of these species has always been
very limited.

  Leaves linear, in clusters of 2, 3, 5 or more than 5.

    Leaves in bundles of 2-5.                               1 Pinus.

    Leaves in bundles of more than 5.                       2 Larix.

  Leaves linear and solitary, or scale-like.

    Leaves all linear.

      Leaves obtuse.                                        3 Tsuga.

      Leaves sharp-pointed.

        Leaves green on both sides, alternate.              4 Taxodium.

        Leaves glaucous beneath, opposite or whorled.       6 Juniperus.

    Leaves all scale-like, or some of the branches with
        linear sharp-pointed leaves.

      Leaves all scale-like, fruit a cone of 8-12
          imbricated scales.                                5 Thuja.

      Leaves scale-like or some linear and sharp-pointed,
          fruit berry-like.                                 6 Juniperus.


=1. PÌNUS.= The Pines.

Evergreen trees with needle-shaped leaves in bundles of 2-5 or 7;
flowers appearing in the spring, the staminate clustered at the base of
the season's shoots, the pistillate on the side or near the end of the
shoots; fruit a woody cone which matures at the end of the second
season, or more rarely at the end of the third season; scales of the
cone variously thickened; seeds in pairs at the base of the scales.

There are about 70 species of pines of which three are native to
Indiana. Commercially the pines are classed as soft and hard. In our
area the soft pines are represented by the white pine, while the gray
and Jersey pines are classed as hard pines.

  Leaves 5 in a bundle, 6-12 cm. long.                     1 P. Strobus.

  Leaves 2-3 in a bundle.

    Scales of cones unarmed, leaves usually 2-4 cm. long.  2 P. Banksiana.

    Scales of cones tipped with a short spine, leaves
        usually over 4 cm. long.                           3 P. virginiana.

=1.= =Pinus Stròbus= Linnæus. White Pine. Plate 2. Bark greenish and
smooth on young trees, becoming reddish or gray and furrowed on old
trees; young twigs scurvy-pubescent, soon smooth and light brown; leaves
normally 5 in a bundle, sometimes more, 6-12 cm. long, 3-sided,
sharp-pointed, bluish-green, maturing and falling at end of second
season; cones ripening at end of second season, usually 10-20 cm. long;
wood light, soft, not strong, works easily, takes a good polish, and
warps little.

=Distribution.=--Newfoundland to Manitoba, south to Iowa, Kentucky and
along the Alleghany Mountains to northern Georgia. The mass distribution
of this species is to the north of our area, and in Indiana it is local
and found in small numbers. It is a common tree on some of the dunes
bordering Lake Michigan, and is found locally throughout the area
bordering Lake Michigan. Its distribution in this part of the State has
not been studied, but it is believed that in Lake and Porter Counties it
is not at present found far from the Lake. Blatchley[1] reports "a
thicket of this species about a peat bog on the Hayward farm one mile
east of Merrillville in Lake County." The writer has seen it as a
frequent tree in a black oak woods about four miles southwest of
Michigan City, also quite a number of large trees seven miles northeast
of Michigan City in a swampy woods, associated with white elm, black
ash, soft maple, etc.

Nieuwland[2] reports a single tree found in a tamarack swamp 25 miles
east of Michigan City near Lydick in St. Joseph County. The next
appearance of this species is to the south in Warren County on the
outcrops of sandstone along Big Pine, Little Pine, Rock and Kickapoo
Creeks. It is found more or less on bluffs of these creeks. It was the
most abundant along Big Pine Creek, and followed up the creek for a
distance of about ten miles, or midway between Rainsville and Indian
Village. To the south it is next found in Fountain County on the
outcrops of sandstone along Big Shawnee and Bear Creeks. Franklin Watts
who owns the "Bear Creek Canyon" just south of Fountain says he
remembers the area before any cutting was done along the creek. He says
that the white pine was a common tree along the creek for a distance of
half a mile and that a few scattered trees were found as far as 40 rods
from the creek. He stated that the largest trees were about 30 inches in
diameter and as high as the highest of the surrounding trees. Moving
southward it is next found on a ridge of sandstone in Montgomery County
on the south side of Sugar Creek about a mile east of the shades. Here
it is closely associated with hemlock which is absent in all of the
stations to the north. Coulter[3] reports a colony in the "knobs" of the
northeast corner of Floyd County. This species was also reported from
Clark County by Baird and Taylor. The writer has made inquiry and
diligently searched for this species in this county but failed to locate
it. In the vicinity of Borden where the Jersey pine grows, millmen
distinguish two kinds of pines. Investigation showed that both are
Jersey pine. The one with resinous exudations along the trunk is one
kind, and trunks without exudation is the other. Since Baird and Taylor
include cultivated trees in their list of the plants of Clark County, it
is proposed to drop this reference.

[Illustration: Plate 2.

PINUS STROBUS Linnæus. (× 1/2.) White Pine.]

=Remarks.=--White pine on account of the excellent qualities of its wood
is in great demand, and has always ranked as one of our leading timber
trees. In fact it was so highly prized that practically all of the
original stand of this species has been cut.

The tree adapts itself to many habitats, hence has been used extensively
for forestry purposes both in America and Europe. In fact it was the
most used tree in forestry until about ten years ago when the white pine
blister rust was discovered in America. This disease is now found in
practically all of the states where this species forms dense stands.
However, Federal and State authorities are trying to stamp out the
disease. In Indiana it is a species well worth a trial for forestry
purposes, especially in windbreaks where other species are used.

=2.= =Pinus Banksiàna= Lambert. Gray Pine. Jack Pine. Plate 3. A small
tree 10-15 m. high with reddish-brown bark, broken into short flakes;
shoots of season yellow-green, turning reddish-brown, smooth; leaves
dark green, in twos, 2-5 cm. long, divergent, curved or twisted, rigid,
sharp-pointed, persisting for two or three years; cones sessile,
sharp-pointed, oblique at the base, 3-5 cm. long, usually pointing in
the direction of the branch; wood light, soft and weak.

=Distribution.=--The most northern of all of our pines. Nova Scotia to
northern New York, northern Illinois, Minnesota and northward. In
Indiana it is found only on and among the sand dunes in the immediate
vicinity of Lake Michigan, and in no instance has it been seen more than
three miles from the Lake. Found sparingly in Lake, Porter and Laporte
Counties. It is the most abundant in the vicinity of Dune Park.

[Illustration: Plate 3.

PINUS BANKSIANA Lambert. Gray or Jack Pine. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 4.

PINUS VIRGINIANA Miller. Jersey or Scrub Pine. (×1/2.)]

=3.= =Pinus virginiàna= Miller. Jersey Pine. Scrub Pine. Plate 4. Bark
dark-brown with rather shallow fissures, the ridges broken, somewhat
scaly; shoots green, light brown or purplish with a bloom, becoming a
gray-brown; leaves in bundles of two, rarely three, twisted, usually
about 4-5 cm. long, deciduous during the third or fourth year; cones
sessile or nearly so, narrowly conic when closed, 4-7 cm. long, opening
in the autumn of the second season; scales armed with a curved spine 2-4
mm. long; wood light, soft, weak, brittle and slightly resinous.

=Distribution.=--Long Island to South Carolina, Alabama and north to
Indiana and Licking County, Ohio. The distribution in Indiana is quite
limited, and has never been understood by authors who variously give it
as found throughout the southern part of Indiana. It is confined to the
knob area of Floyd, Clark and Scott Counties, and the southeastern part
of Washington County. In the original forest it is confined to the tops
of the knobs where it is associated with Quercus Prinus (Gray's Man. 7th
Edition). It propagates easily from self-sown seed, hence is soon found
on the lower slopes of cut-over lands, and soon occupies fallow fields.
It is now found in the open woods several miles east of the knobs in the
preceding counties, but pioneers of this section say it was not a
constituent of the original forests but has come in since the original
forests were heavily cut over. It is believed that it crowned the knobs
over our area from 5-10 miles wide extending through the counties named
and extending northward about 25 miles. This species is found in the
open woods on a few hills on the Millport Ridge in the northern part of
Washington County, and it appears as if native, but investigation showed
that it had spread from a tree on the site of a pioneer's cabin. It is
also found as a frequent escape on the wooded bluff of Raccoon Creek in
the southern part of Owen County, and appears as native here. It is
associated on the bluff and slope with hemlock. Chas. Green, a man of
sixty years, who owns the place says the trees were seeded by a tree
planted in his father's yard nearby. His father also planted a white
pine in his yard, and it is to be noted while the Jersey Pine has freely
escaped the white pine has not, although the habitat seems favorable.

=Remarks.=--In its native habitat on the exposed summits of the "knobs"
it is usually a small tree about 3 dm. in diameter and 10 m. high. When
it finds lodgement on the lower slopes and coves it may attain a
diameter of 7 dm. and a height of 25 m. This tree is really entitled to
be called "old field pine" on account of its ability to establish itself
on them.

From the ease with which this species propagates itself from seed it
seems worthy a trial for forestry purposes in the "knob" area of the
State. However, all attempts to grow this species from seedlings at the
Forest Reserve have failed.


=2. LÀRIX.= The Larches.

=Larix laricìná= (Du Roi) Koch. Tamarack. Plate No. 5. Tall spire-like
trees, usually 2-3 dm. in diameter, rarely as large as 5 dm. in
diameter; bark gray or reddish-brown, scaly; twigs slender, smooth,
light brown, becoming a dark gray brown; leaves scattered along the
shoots of the season, in fascicles on the older branches, usually 20-50
in a bundle; filiform, 1-2.5 cm. long, obtuse at apex, triangular in
cross-section, all falling off late in autumn; staminate flowers borne
on the short leafless branches, the pistillate appear with the leaves on
the branches of the previous season; cones borne on short, stout
branchlets, normally erect or inclined to be so, 10-20 mm. long,
purplish brown while growing, turning to a light brown at maturity,
persisting on the tree for about a year; wood hard, heavy, light brown,
variable in strength.

=Distribution.=--Labrador, Newfoundland south to southern New York, West
Virginia, northern Ohio and Indiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota and northward.
In Indiana it is confined to the northern part of the State, and has not
been reported south of the northern part of Cass County. The most
southern station in the eastern part of the State is about Lake Everett
in the northwest part of Allen County. It is found on low borders of
lakes, in swamps and in bogs. In all of its stations in Indiana it is
found growing near the water level in great depths of organic matter
more or less decomposed or in beds of peat, which contain little or
practically no soil. Where it is found, it usually forms a pure stand.

=Remarks.=--Formerly the tamarack was a common tree in its area.
Recently many of the tamarack swamps have been drained. This with heavy
cutting has reduced the supply of tamarack in Indiana to an
insignificant amount. The tamarack is popularly classed as white and
yellow--the yellow being considered the better of the two. In our area
it is used principally for poles and posts. There is a diversity of
opinion as to the durability of tamarack in contact with the soil. The
most authentic information places the life of fence posts at about ten
years.

[Illustration: Plate 5.

LARIX LARICINA (Du Roi) Koch. Tamarack. (×1.)]


=3. TSÙGA.= The Hemlocks.

=Tsuga canadénsis= (Linnæus) Carrière. Hemlock. Plate 6. Tall trees, 3-7
dm. in diameter, with reddish-brown or grayish bark, deeply furrowed;
shoots very slender and hairy, becoming smooth in a few years; leaves
apparently 2-ranked, persisting for about three years, linear, short
petioled, 6-13 mm. long, usually about 10 mm. long, usually flat, obtuse
or notched at apex, bright green and shiny above, bluish-white beneath;
staminate flowers appear early in the spring from buds in the axils of
the leaves of the previous season, the pistillate terminal, erect,
oblong; cones almost sessile and pendulous, borne on the end of last
year's branch, maturing the first season, ovoid, 1.5-2.5 cm. long; wood
light, soft, brittle, not durable, difficult to work, splintery but
holds a nail well.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia south to Delaware, west to Minnesota and
southeastward through Indiana and eastern Kentucky, thence southward on
the mountains to northern Alabama. In Indiana it is not found[4] north
of Brown County. It is found in limited numbers at the following places:
on a bluff of Bean Blossom Creek in Brown County; on a steep wooded
slope on the south side of a small creek about one and a half miles
north of Borden in Clark County, and also reported on the bank of Silver
Creek between Clark and Floyd Counties; a few trees on the top and sides
of the cliffs about one mile east of Taswell in Crawford County; a few
trees on the bluff of Guthrie Creek in Jackson County; a few trees along
the north fork of the Muscatatuck River between Vernon and North Vernon
in Jennings County; a few trees on the south bank of Back Creek near
Leesville in Lawrence County; frequent on the banks of Sugar Creek near
the "Shades" in Montgomery County; a few trees on the bank of Raccoon
Creek in the southern part of Owen County; frequent on the bank of Sugar
Creek in Turkey Run State Park in Parke County; a few trees on the banks
of Raccoon and Walnut Creeks in Putnam County. Also reported by
Beeler[5] as found on a bluff of White River in Morgan County.

In all of its stations it is found on sandstone bluffs on the south side
of streams, giving it a north or northwest exposure. In a few of the
stations there are no small trees, but in Montgomery County along Sugar
Creek it is reproducing well.

=Remarks.=--Hemlock is of no economic importance in Indiana. The bark is
much used in tanning. Hemlock is frequently used for a hedge plant, also
as a specimen tree in parks, etc.

[Illustration: Plate 6.

TSUGA CANADENSIS (Linnæus) Carrière. Hemlock. (×1/2.)]


=4. TAXÒDIUM.= The Bald Cypress.

=Taxodium dístichum= (Linnæus) L. C. Richard. Cypress. Plate 7. Large
tall straight trees, up to 18 dm. in diameter and 45 m. high, usually
with a buttressed base which is frequently hollow. In wet situations it
develops steeple-shaped projections from the roots to above the water
level, known as "knees"; bark gray or reddish-brown, separating from the
trunk in long thin narrow strips; shoots light green, smooth, turning
reddish-brown the first year, then a darker brown; leaves spirally
arranged, appearing as if 2-ranked on vegetative shoots, linear, 5-15
mm. long, sessile, acute, yellowish-green, turning brown in the fall and
dropping off; staminate flowers numerous, borne on long terminal
panicles, pistillate flowers solitary in the axils of the leaves; fruit
a cone, globose, about 2.5 cm. in diameter, the surface with some
wrinkles made by the edges of the closely fitting scales; wood light,
soft and straight-grained, rather weak, does not warp or shrink much and
reputed to be very durable when exposed to soil or weather.

=Distribution.=--Along the Atlantic coast from Delaware to Florida and
along the Gulf west to Texas and north along the Mississippi Valley to
Indiana. In Indiana it has a peculiar and limited distribution. The mass
distribution was just north and west of Decker in Knox County.
Collett[6] estimates that 20,000 acres were "covered with a fine forest
of cypress". Wright[7] maps the other places in the southern part of
Knox County where the cypress was known to have occurred. At present the
only cypress in Knox County is in the extreme southwest part of the
county, and is known as Little Cypress swamp. Here it is associated with
such trees as white elm and Schneck's oak. It is believed that it
extended only a few miles north of the Deshee River. Going southward it
has not been seen in Gibson County, and is first noted in Posey County
along the Wabash River in a cypress pond about 12 miles southwest of Mt.
Vernon. Then again in Posey County along the Ohio River on the shores of
Hovey Lake, and in a slough about 3 miles east of Mt. Vernon. It
occurred in a few spots in Vanderburg County along the Ohio River
southwest of Evansville. It again appears in limited numbers along
Cypress Creek a few miles east of Newburg in Warrick County, which is
its eastern[8] known limit.

The cypress in all of its stations is found only in places that are for
the greater part of the year under water.

=Remarks.=--The original stand of cypress in Indiana has practically all
been cut, and the swamps drained and now under cultivation. In the
slough east of Mt. Vernon for several years, thousands of seedlings of
the year have been noted, but for some reason they do not survive a
second year. The present indications are that the cypress will be
extinct in Indiana before many years because practically no small trees
can be found.

[Illustration: Plate 7.

TAXODIUM DISTICHUM (Linnæus) L. C. Richard. Cypress. (× 1/2.)]

This species is highly recommended by some nurserymen for ornamental
planting. It proves hardy in the southern part of the state. It is a
fast growing tree, adapted to a wet soil, but will succeed in drier
situations.


=5. THÙJA.= Arbor-Vitæ.

=Thuja occidentàlis= Linnæus. Arbor-Vitæ. Plate 8. Small evergreen trees
with a conical crown, bark on old trees reddish-brown or dark gray,
shreddy; branchlets compressed, reddish-brown; leaves all closely
appressed, in alternate pairs, scale-like, about 3 mm. long on young
branchlets, on old branches somewhat longer together with a spine 2-3
mm. long; flowers appear early in the spring from the ends of the
branches; cones mature the first season, about 1 cm. long and .5 cm. in
diameter; wood soft, brittle, weak and durable.

=Distribution.=--New Brunswick to Manitoba, south to Minnesota and New
Jersey thence southward along the Alleghanies to North Carolina and
Tennessee. In Indiana it is found native[9] only in Lake and Porter
Counties. In Lake County a few isolated specimens have been found in
several places near Lake Michigan. In Porter County it is known only in
a large tamarack swamp north of the Mineral Springs stop on the Traction
line, and about a mile from Lake Michigan. Here about 100 trees are
found scattered over an area of less than two acres. The largest
specimen measures 70 cm. in circumference. This species is doomed to
early extinction in our area. No doubt it already has vanished from Lake
County, and it is probable that the colony north of Mineral Springs is
the last of the species in Indiana.

=Remarks.=--While only found in a swamp in Indiana, this species adapts
itself to all kinds of soils and exposures. It transplants readily and
is used for ornamental purposes, and for windbreaks. Dwarf forms are
frequently planted for hedges. The wood is used principally for poles
and posts, and is commercially known as white cedar.


=6. JUNÍPERUS.= The Junipers.

Evergreen shrubs or trees, leaves opposite or whorled, sessile,
scale-like or short-linear; fruit berry-like; seeds 1-3.

=Juniperus virginiàna= Linnæus. Red Cedar. Plate 9. A small tree,
usually 1-2 dm. and rarely up to 5 dm. in diameter; bark shreddy;
branches usually more or less ascending which gives the tree a narrow
conic appearance; shoots green, soon turning light to reddish-brown and
on older branches gray or dark brown; leaves 4-ranked, scale-like and
1.5-2 mm. long, or subulate, decurrent at base and 3-10 mm. long on
vigorous branches or very small trees; flowers terminal; fruit ripening
the first season, berry-like, globose but longer than wide, with a bloom
and a very resinous pulp about the seeds which are usually 1 or 2; wood
light, brittle, close-grained, durable and fragrant.

[Illustration: Plate 8.

THUJA OCCIDENTALIS Linnæus. Arbor-Vitæ. (× 1/2.).]

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia south to Florida, west to Texas and north
to South Dakota. It is found in all parts of Indiana, although sparingly
in the northern part, especially where streams with bluffs are absent.
No doubt this species in the original forests was confined principally
to the bluffs of streams and rocky ravines. Since the forests have been
cut, it is now found growing along fences, in open dry woods, and in
southern Indiana it is a common tree in old abandoned fields, and in
waste places.

=Remarks.=--Red cedar has had many uses, and the large trees have been
practically all harvested. It is now used principally for poles, posts,
crossties, cigar boxes and lead pencils. It is the best wood known for
lead pencils. The odor is so objectionable to insects that a market has
been made for chests of this wood in which to store clothing and furs.




=SALICÀCEAE.=[10] The Willow Family.


Trees or shrubs with bitter bark; simple alternate leaves; flowers in
catkins, which fall off as a whole, the staminate after flowering, the
pistillate after ripening and scattering of the seeds, the staminate and
pistillate on different plants (dioecious); flower scales single, below
each flower; fruit a lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate capsule opening
lengthwise into 2 recurving carpels or valves; seeds numerous, minute,
oblong, bearing a tuft of hairs at the base. Genera 2, _Salix_, the
willows, and _Populus_, the aspens and poplars, or cottonwoods,
separated by the following characters, those applying only to Indiana
trees species in parentheses:

  Buds covered by a single scale; (leaf-blades mostly
      enlongated, more than twice as long as wide); flower
      scales entire or rarely shallowly toothed at apex;
      stamens mostly 2 or 3-8 or 10                         1 Salix.

  Buds covered by numerous scales; (leaf-blades mostly
      cordate-ovate, less than twice as long as broad);
      flower scales deeply cut or lacerate; stamens more
      than 10                                               2 Populus.

[Illustration: Plate 9.

JUNIPERUS VIRGINIANA Linnæus. Red Cedar. (× 1/2.)]


=1. SÀLIX.= The Willows.

Trees or shrubs (occasionally herbaceous) with usually clustered teims,
twigs round; leaf-blades lanceolate and long-acuminate or
elliptic-lanceolate and short pointed in all Indiana tree species,
finely toothed or nearly entire; catkins appearing before (precocious),
with (coetaneous), or after the leaves (serotinous); each pistillate
flower with a little gland at the base of the pedicel on the inside.

A large genus of several hundred species varying from tiny shrubby or
subherbaceous plants scarcely an inch in height to 0.5 m. (2 feet) or
more in diameter, in alluvial lowlands; occurring under Indiana
conditions from cold bogs and river banks to dry sand dunes. Willows are
used for many purposes, among them ornament, shade, hedges, posts,
poles, mattresses, revetments to protect levees, baskets, fish-weirs,
whistles, etc., while the wood is used for charcoal, which is especially
prized for gunpowder making, and the bark is used for tanning and
furnishes salicin, which is used in medicine as a substitute for quinine
and as a tonic and febrifuge.

  Small to large trees; leaves narrowly to broadly lanceolate,
      mostly long pointed, finely and rather closely toothed;
      flowers appearing with the leaves; capsules not hairy.

    Native trees; leaves green on both sides (No. 1) or white
        (glaucous) beneath (No. 2), and then with very long
        points and long slender twisted petioles which are
        never glandular; stamens 3-5-7 or more.

      Twigs dark green, spreading; leaves narrowly
          lanceolate, green on both sides; petioles
          short                                          1 S. nigra.

      Twigs yellowish, somewhat drooping; leaves broadly
          lanceolate, glaucous beneath; petioles long,
          twisted                                        2 S. amygdaloides.

    European trees, cultivated for ornament and use;
        leaves always glaucous beneath; stamens always 2.

      Teeth on edge of leaf 8-10 to each cm. (20-25 to
          the inch); petioles usually glandular;
          capsules almost sessile                        3 S. alba.

      Teeth on edge of leaf 6-8 per cm. (15-20 to the
          inch); petioles usually glandular; pedicels
          0.5-1 mm. long                                 4 S. fragilis.

  Shrubs or rarely small trees; leaves elliptical or
      oblanceolate, short pointed; margin entire or
      coarsely wavy or shallow-toothed; flowers before
      the leaves; stamens 2; capsules long, hairy.

    Twigs and leaves not hairy; leaves thin              5 S. discolor.

    Twigs and sometimes the lower surface of the leaves
        densely hairy, leaves thicker                    6 S. discolor
                                                            eriocephala.

[Illustration: Plate 10.

SALIX NIGRA Marshall. Black Willow. (× 1/2.)]

=1.= =Salix nìgra= Marshall. Willow. Black Willow. Plate 10. Shrub or
tree 5-20 m. (17-65 feet) high, dark green in mass color; bark of trunk
thick, rough, flaky, dark brown to nearly black; twigs brittle at base,
the younger pubescent and green, becoming glabrous and darker with age;
buds ovate, small, 2-3 mm. (1/8 inch) long; petioles 3-6 or 8 mm.
(1/8-3/8 inch) long; stipules small, ovate to roundish; leaf blades
narrowly lanceolate, acute or rounded at base, long-acuminate at the
apex, 6-11 cm. (2-1/4-4-1/4 inches) long, 7-12 mm. (1/4-1/2 inch) wide,
often falcate (scythe-shaped), the so-called variety =falcata=, finely
serrate, green on both sides, shining above, paler and dull beneath,
glabrous or sometimes pubescent beneath on midrib and larger veins;
flowers appearing with the leaves in late April in the southern part of
the State and well into May in the northern part; catkins slender, 2-5
or 6 cm. (4/5-2 or 2-1/2 inches) long, the staminate bright yellow;
capsules 3-5 mm. (1/8 inch) long, ovoid or ovoid-lanceolate, on pedicels
1-2 mm. (1/16 inch) long.

=Distribution.=--New Brunswick and New England, westward to the eastern
part of the Great Plains area from North Dakota to Texas, and, in some
forms, westward across that State and into Mexico. It is interesting
that this species, the first willow published in America, in the first
book on American Botany ever published in this country, should be
abundantly and widely distributed in the United States.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties in Indiana:--Allen
(Deam); Bartholomew (Deam); Clark (Deam); Crawford (Deam); Dearborn
(Deam); Dubois (Deam); Decatur (Deam); Floyd (Deam); Fulton (Deam);
Harrison (Deam); Hendricks (Deam); Henry (Deam); Jackson (Deam); Jay
(Deam); Jennings (Deam); Knox (Deam); Kosciusko (Deam); Lagrange (Deam);
Marion (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Marshall (Deam); Miami (Deam); Morgan
(Deam); Noble (Deam); Ohio (Deam); Parke (Deam); Perry (Deam); Porter
(Deam); Posey (Deam); Pulaski (Deam); Ripley (Deam); Steuben (Deam);
Sullivan (Deam); Tippecanoe (Deam); Vermillion (Deam); Wabash (Deam);
Warrick (Deam); White (Deam).

=Economic Uses.=--The black willow is used very extensively along the
lower reaches of the Mississippi River in making mattresses which
protect the levees from washing. In 1912, it was estimated that 150,000
cords were used annually.

=2.= =Salix amygdaloìdes= Andersson. Willow. Peach-leaved Willow. Plate
11. Trees 3-12 m. (10-40 feet) high, yellowish-green in mass color; bark
of trunk fissured, dark brown or reddish-brown; twigs longer and less
brittle than those of _Salix nigra_, yellowish to reddish-brown, usually
somewhat drooping, giving a "weeping" effect, which, with the color,
makes the species easily recognizable from a distance; buds ovoid, about
3 mm. (1/8 inch) long, colored as the twigs; petioles long, slender,
twisted, 5-15 or 20 mm. (1/4-4/5 inch) long; leaves lanceolate to
broadly lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, rounded or somewhat acute at
base, long-pointed at apex, closely serrulate, 5-12 cm. (2-5 inches)
long, 1.5-3 cm. (3/5-1-1/4 inches) wide, yellowish-green above, glaucous
beneath, glabrous; flowers appear from late April throughout May,
usually later than those of _Salix nigra_; catkins slender, 3-5 cm.
(1-2 inches) long, the fertile becoming 4-8 cm. (1-1/2-3 inches) long in
fruit; capsules lanceolate, 4-5 mm. (1/6 inch) long; pedicels slender, 2
mm. (1/12 inch) long.

[Illustration: Plate 11.

SALIX AMYGDALOIDES Andersson. Peach-leaved Willow. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--From Western Quebec and Central New York, west to the
Cascade Mountains in British Columbia, Washington and Oregon, south to
Colorado and northwest Texas. In Indiana fairly common in the northern
third, rare in the central third, and lacking in the southern portion of
the State.

Specimens have been seen from Indiana from the following counties:
Elkhart (Deam); Fulton (Deam); Henry (Deam); Jasper (Deam); Kosciusko
(Deam); Lake (Deam), (Umbach); Laporte (Deam); Marion (Mrs. Chas. C.
Deam); Marshall (Deam); Pulaski (Deam); Steuben (Deam); Wells (Deam);
White (Deam).

=3.= =Salix álba= Linnæus. Willow. White Willow. Plate 12. Trees with
1-5 spreading stems, 5-20 m. (17-65 feet) high; bark rough, coarsely
ridged, gray to brownish; twigs brittle at base, green or yellowish,
glabrous; buds 5-6 mm. (1/4 inch) long; petioles 5-10 mm. (1/5-2/5 inch)
long, seldom glandular; leaves lanceolate, 5-12 cm. (2-5 inches) long,
1-2.5 cm. (2/5-1 inch) wide, acuminate at apex, usually acute at base,
leaves bright green above, glaucous beneath, thinly to densely silky on
both sides when young, often permanently silky beneath, margins with
about 9-10 teeth per cm. (2/5 inch), usually glandular; flowers with the
leaves, in April and May; catkins slender, cylindrical, 3-6 cm.
(1-1/4-2-1/2 inches) long; scales pale yellow; capsules ovoid-conical,
3-5 mm. (1/4 inch) long, almost sessile. The common form usually is
referred to variety =vitellina= (Linnæus) Koch, with orange twigs and
more glabrate leaves.

=Distribution.=--A native of Europe which has been frequently planted
and sometimes escapes.

Specimens have been seen from Indiana from the following counties:
Gibson (Schneck); Hamilton (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Harrison (Deam);
Switzerland (Deam); Warren (Deam); Wells (Deam).

=4.= =Salix frágilis= Linnæus. Willow. Crack Willow. Plate 13. Tree very
similar to _Salix alba_; twigs very brittle at the base (hence the
name), green to reddish; petioles 7-15 mm. (1/4-5/8 inch) long,
glandular just below the base of the leaf; leaves lanceolate, acuminate,
7-15 cm. (3-6 inches) long, 2-3.5 cm. (4/5-1-1/2 inches) wide, coarsely
serrate with 5-6 teeth to each cm. (2/5 inch) of margin, dark green and
shining above, paler to glaucous beneath, rarely green, glabrous on both
sides; catkins appearing with the leaves in late April and during May,
4-8 cm. (1-1/2-3 inches) long; capsules slenderly conical, 4-5 mm. (1/5
inch) long, on pedicels 0.5-1 mm. (1/16 inch) long.

[Illustration: Plate 12.

SALIX ALBA Linnæus. White Willow. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 13.

SALIX FRAGILIS Linnæus. Crack Willow. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--A native of Europe. It has been frequently planted and
often escapes.

Specimens have been seen from the following Indiana counties: Benton
(Deam); Clark (Deam); Laporte (Deam); Switzerland (Deam); Union (Deam);
Wells (Deam).

=Economic Uses.=--This species and the white willow are introduced from
Europe and extensively grown for the production of charcoal to use in
powder making.

=5.= =Salix díscolor= Muhlenberg. Pussy Willow. Swamp Willow. Glaucous
Willow. Plate 14. Shrub or small tree, 2-4 or occasionally 7-5 m. (7-15
or 25 feet) high; bark thin, usually smooth, reddish brown; twigs
stoutish, reddish-purple to dark brown, often pubescent (see the
variety); buds large, 5-10 mm. (1/5-2/5 inch) long, colored as the
twigs; stipules large, mostly roundish, entire or toothed; leaves
short-lanceolate to elliptic or elliptic-oblanceolate, acute or
short-acuminate at the apex, rounded or acute at the base, 5-10 cm. (2-4
inches) long, 2-3.5 cm. (4/5-1-1/2 inches) wide, nearly entire to
coarsely wavy-toothed on the margins, dark shining green above, densely
glaucous and occasionally somewhat pubescent beneath, especially on
midrib and primaries; flowers appear in late March or in April before
the leaves; catkins sessile, on old wood, stout, dense, the staminate
very beautiful (pussies), without leaf-bracts at base, 2-5 cm. (1-2
inches) long, the pistillate becoming 3-8 cm. (1-1/2-3 inches) long in
fruit; scales elliptic-oblanceolate, densely clothed with long shining
hairs; capsules conic-rostrate, 7-10 or 12 mm. (1/4-1/2 inch) long,
densely gray-woolly; pedicels 1.5-3 mm. (1/16-1/8 inch) long.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia south to Delaware and west to the eastern
edge of the Great Plains area. Fairly well distributed over the entire
State of Indiana. Specimens have been seen from the following counties:
Allen (Deam); Dearborn (Deam); Decatur (Deam); Elkhart (Deam); Fulton
(Deam); Gibson (Schneck); Hancock (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Henry (Deam);
Jackson (Deam); Jay (Deam); Jefferson (Deam); Jennings (Deam); Knox
(Deam); Lake (Deam); Marion (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Marshall (Deam);
Newton (Deam); Porter (Deam); Randolph (Deam); Ripley (Deam); Shelby
(Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Sullivan (Deam); Tippecanoe (Deam); Wabash (Deam);
Warren (Deam); Wayne (Deam); Wells (Deam); White (Deam).

=5a.= =Salix discolor= variety =eriòcéphala= (Michaux) Andersson.
Differs from the species chiefly in rather densely pubescent twigs and
buds; thicker and more lanceolate leaves, usually more or less pubescent
beneath; and the sometimes more densely pubescent catkins.

[Illustration: Plate 14.

SALIX DISCOLOR Muhlenberg. Pussy Willow. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Range of the species but less common. Specimens have
been seen from the following Indiana counties: Cass (Deam); Decatur
(Deam); Fulton (Deam); Gibson (Schneck); Jackson (Deam); Jay (Deam);
Knox (Deam); Laporte (Deam); Pulaski (Deam); Sullivan (Deam); Warren
(Deam); Wayne (Deam).


=2. PÓPULUS.= The Poplars.

Rapidly growing trees; buds usually large, scaly and more or less
resinous; leaves alternate, broad, toothed or sometimes lobed; flowers
appearing before the leaves on large pendulous catkins; anthers red or
purple.

In the following key mature leaves from trees are considered:

  Petioles round or channeled, scarcely or not at all
      flattened laterally.

    Leaves chalky-white tomentose beneath, some of them
        more or less lobed, blades 6-10 cm. long        1 P. alba.

    Leaves pubescent or whitish tomentose while young,
        never lobed, blades 10-17 cm. long              2 P. heterophylla.

  Petioles strongly flattened laterally especially near
      the blade.

    Winter buds more than 8 mm. in length, stamens more
        than 20, capsules more than 3 mm. in diameter,
        leaves broadly deltoid, majority more than
        8 cm. wide                                      3 P. deltoides.

    Winter buds less than 8 mm. in length, stamens fewer
        than 20, capsules less than 3 mm. in diameter,
        leaves roundish ovate, majority less than 8 cm. wide.

      Winter buds more or less pubescent, dull; leaves
          generally with less than 12 teeth to a side   4 P. grandidentata.

      Winter buds smooth or rarely somewhat pubescent,
          glossy; leaves with more than 12 teeth to a
          side                                          5 P. tremuloides.


=1.= =Populus álba= Linnæus. Silver-leaf Poplar. Plate 15. Short-trunked
trees with a round top, up to a meter or more in diameter; bark on young
trees smooth, greenish-white or gray, becoming furrowed on old trees,
gray or dark brown; shoots white tomentose, becoming smooth in age;
leaves ovate or triangular, 3-5 lobed or irregularly toothed, hairy on
both surfaces on expanding, becoming dark green and glabrous above,
remaining white tomentose beneath; stamens about 8; wood light, soft and
weak.

=Distribution.=--Introduced from Europe and escaped in all parts of the
State.

=Remarks.=--This tree has long been under cultivation, and several
horticultural forms have been introduced. It is falling into disuse on
account of its habit of sending up root shoots. It adapts itself to all
kinds of soil, grows rapidly, transplants easily, stands pruning well
and has few insect or fungous enemies.

[Illustration: Plate 15.

POPULUS ALBA Linnæus. Silver-leaf Poplar. (× 1/2.)]

=2.= =Populus heterophylla= Linnæus. Swamp Cottonwood. Swamp Poplar.
Plate 16. Tall trees up to 5-8 dm. in diameter; bark of old trees very
thick, broken into long ridges which are separated by deep furrows,
reddish-brown but generally weathered to ash-color; shoots densely
woolly at first, becoming glabrous before the second season; leaves
broadly-ovate with petioles 2-10 cm. long, more or less woolly on both
surfaces on unfolding, becoming glabrous above and remaining woolly
beneath, at least on the larger veins, rarely becoming entirely
glabrous, usually cordate at the base, blunt at apex, margins rather
regularly crenate-serrate; flowers in April; capsules ripening in June,
about 6 mm. in diameter, on stalks 5-10 mm. long; wood same as the next
species.

=Distribution.=--Along the Atlantic Coast from Connecticut to Florida
and along the Gulf to Louisiana, and northward along the Mississippi
Valley to Michigan. It is found in many parts of Indiana. In the
northern counties it is found in "gumbo" soils in swamps. It is a common
tree in the river swamps of the lower Wabash Valley where it reaches its
greatest size. There are no records for the extreme southeastern part
of the State, although it has been found in swamps in Harrison and Clark
Counties and is found in many counties of Ohio.

=Remarks.=--The pith of the shoots of this species is orange which
easily distinguishes it from all other species of the genus which have a
white pith. This species in all of its range is closely associated with
the common cottonwood, and millmen make no distinction in the price or
qualities of the timber.

=3.= =Populus deltoìdes= Marshall. Cottonwood. Carolina Poplar.
(_Populus balsamifera_ var. _virginiana_ (Castiglioni) Sargent). Plate
17. One of the largest trees of the Indiana forests; bark of very old
trees very thick, broken into ridges up to 1 dm. or more in thickness,
separated by deep furrows, reddish-brown, weathering to a gray; leaves
hairy on both surfaces as they unfold, soon glabrous except on the
margins which are more or less ciliate, broadly-deltoid, usually 7-12
cm. long, and about as wide, base more or less truncate or cordate, or
somewhat wedge-shaped, with rather short acuminate tips,
crenate-serrate; capsules ovate, about 6 mm. in diameter, on stalks 1-2
mm. long; wood light, soft, weak, sap wood white, heartwood small and
brown; warps badly on drying.

=Distribution.=--Quebec to Florida and west to the Rocky Mountains.
Throughout Indiana in low ground along streams, in swamps and about
lakes. On account of its habit of growing only in low ground it is
infrequent in the hill country of southern Indiana.

[Illustration: Plate 16.

POPULUS HETEROPHYLLA Linnæus. Swamp Cottonwood. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 17.

POPULUS DELTOIDES Marshall. Cottonwood. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--The cottonwood is adapted to a moist soil, propagates
easily, grows rapidly and is one of the best trees for forestry purposes
for planting overflow lands, and for planting where a quick shade is
desired or for temporary windbreaks.

The leaves of this tree are quite variable and several forms have been
described. The Carolina poplar of nurserymen has an upright habit of
growth and was formerly much planted as a shade tree. Its undesirable
qualities have condemned it, and most cities now prohibit its planting.

Cottonwood has many uses, and was formerly a very important timber tree,
but the supply has so diminished that large trees have become quite
scarce. The thick bark was much used by the boys of the pioneers for
whittling out toys, etc.

=4.= =Populus grandidentàta= Michaux. Large-toothed Aspen. Plate 18. A
small or medium-sized tree, 1-4 dm. in diameter; bark smooth,
grayish-green or whitish, becoming furrowed and dark brown on the trunks
of old trees that grow in the northern part of the State, especially
when growing in a swampy habitat. In the southern part of the State
where the tree usually grows on the top of hills, the bark does not
darken so much, frequently remaining a light to dark gray until
maturity. Shoots more or less woolly at first, becoming glabrous,
reddish-brown; leaves on sprouts and very young trees very velvety
beneath, slightly hairy above, ovate in outline, cordate at base and
with blades up to 20 cm. in length; leaves on older trees a yellow
green, glabrous, ovate, blades usually 6-10 cm. long, coarsely and
unevenly toothed, the base slightly rounded, rarely truncate or slightly
cordate, the apex pointed or rounded; petioles strongly flattened
laterally; stamens 6-12; capsule about 5 mm. long on a stalk about 1 mm.
long; wood soft, light and not strong.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia west to northern Minnesota and south to the
Ohio River, and along the Alleghany Mountains to South Carolina. Found
throughout Indiana, except we have no authentic records for Gibson[11]
and Posey[12] Counties. In the northern part of Indiana it is found in
great colonies about lakes, etc. or rarely a few trees on the crests of
gravel and sand ridges. In southern Indiana it is found in the "knob"
area in small colonies on the tops of the ridges associated with scrub
pine and chestnut oak and is rarely found in low ground in this part of
the State.

=Remarks.=--This species is too rare to be of much economic importance.
It could be most profitably used for excelsior and pulp wood.

[Illustration: Plate 18.

POPULUS GRANDIDENTATA Michaux. Large-toothed Aspen. (× 1/2.)]

=5.= =Populus tremuloìdes= Michaux. Quaking Aspen. Plate 19. A straight
narrow tree up to 3 dm. in diameter, usually about 1-5 dm. in diameter;
bark usually smooth, greenish-white or gray, on older trees becoming
rough or fissured, and turning darker; shoots glabrous or with a few
hairs, turning reddish-brown the first season, later to a gray; leaves
of sprouts and very small trees usually ovate with a cordate base and
two or three times as large as leaves of older trees; mature leaves on
older trees variable, glabrous, the prevailing type has a bluish-green
leaf which is widely ovate or nearly orbicular, 3-7 cm. long, truncate
or slightly rounded at the base, usually abruptly short-pointed at apex,
finely and regularly serrate, the unusual type of leaf is thinner,
yellow-green, ovate, 2/3 as wide as long, rounded or wedge-shaped at
base, gradually tapering to a point at the apex, otherwise as the
prevailing form; stamens 6-12; capsules about 6 mm. long, on stalks
about 1 mm. long; wood light, soft and weak.

=Distribution.=--One of the most widely distributed of North American
trees. It ranges from Labrador south to Pennsylvania, thence southwest
to northern Mexico, and then north to northern Alaska. It is found at
sea level and at elevations of 10,000 feet. There are records of its
occurrence in all parts of Indiana. In all of its Indiana stations it
grows only in low ground about lakes, swamps, ponds, low places between
sand dunes, and along streams. In many places in the lake region it is
found in almost pure stands over small areas.

=Remarks.=--In Indiana this species is not of sufficient size and
abundance to be of much economic importance.




=JUGLANDÀCEAE.= The Walnut Family.


Trees with large, aromatic, odd pinnate leaves; flowers appearing after
the leaves unfold, the staminate in catkins, the pistillate solitary or
in clusters; fruit a nut in a fleshy or hard fibrous shell; kernel
edible or astringent.

  Pith of twigs chambered; staminate catkins thick, sessile
      or short stalked; stamens 8-40, glabrous; nuts with a
      network of rough projections                          1 Juglans.

  Pith of twigs not chambered; staminate catkins slender,
      long-stalked; stamens 3-10, hairy; nuts more or less
      angled but smooth                                     2 Carya.


=1. JÙGLANS.= The Walnuts.

Trees with furrowed bark; pulp surrounding nut continuous, without lines
of dehiscence on the surface.

[Illustration: Plate 19.

POPULUS TREMULOIDES Michaux. Quaking Aspen. (× 1/2.)]

  Bark gray, ridges smooth; upper part of leaf-scar of last
      year's twigs with a mat of hairs; pith dark-brown;
      fruit oblong, husk clammy                             1 J. cinerea.

  Bark dark brown, ridges rough; upper part of leaf-scar of
      last year's twigs without a mat of hairs; pith light
      brown; fruit orbicular to slightly elongate, husk not
      clammy                                                2 J. nigra.

=1.= =Juglans cinèrea= Linnæus. Butternut. Plate 20. A medium sized
tree, usually less than 6 dm. in diameter; leaf-scars with upper margin
convex or rarely notched; leaves 3-6 dm. in length; leaflets 7-19, the
middle pairs the longest, clammy, almost sessile, oblong-lanceolate,
6-12 cm. long, fine serrate, rounded at base and acuminate at apex;
flowers in May or June; fruit ripens in October, 4-8 cm. long with 4
prominent longitudinal ridges; kernel sweet and very oily; wood light,
soft, not strong, coarse-grained but takes a good polish.

=Distribution.=--Valley of the St. Lawrence River south to the Gulf
States and west to Nebraska. Found in all parts of Indiana, although
very sparingly in some counties. It is an infrequent tree in our range,
and in only a few localities is it frequent or common. It is found along
streams and in ravines, and in two instances it has been noted in old
tamarack marshes. It prefers a well drained gravelly soil, and is rarely
if ever found in a compact soil.

Thrifty trees of any size in the woodland are now rarely seen. The tops
of the larger trees are usually found in a more or less dying condition.
Benedict and Elrod[13] as early as 1892 make the following observation
in a catalogue of the plants of Cass and Wabash Counties: "A few
scrubby, half dead trees were seen, the last of their race. It seems
unable to adapt itself to new conditions, and is rapidly dying out."

=Remarks.=--This tree is often called the white walnut to distinguish it
from the black walnut from which it is easily separated. It is too rare
in Indiana to be of economic importance, except that trees growing in
the open are spared for the nut crop. Trees growing in the open develop
a short trunk with a wide spreading top and are apparently much
healthier than when grown under forest conditions. The bark of the root
is used in medicine as a hepatic stimulant.

[Illustration: Plate 20.

JUGLANS CINEREA Linnæus. Butternut. (× 1/2.)]

=2.= =Juglans nìgra= Linnæus. Walnut. Plate 21. One of the largest and
most valuable trees of the Indiana forest. Leaf-scars with the upper
margin notched; leaves 3-7 dm. long, mature leaves glabrous above and
pubescent beneath, leaflets, usually 11-23, almost sessile,
ovate-lanceolate, 4-10 cm. long, finely serrate, long-pointed at apex;
flowers in May or June; fruit ripens the first year, in September and
October, globose to oblong, 5-8 cm. in diameter; nut variable, from
subglobose to ovoid or elliptical, more or less rounded or pointed at
the ends, 1.5-3.5 cm. through the widest diameter; kernel edible; wood
heavy, hard, strong, rather coarse, heart wood dark brown, durable,
works easily and takes a high polish.

=Distribution.=--Ontario south to the Gulf States and west to Texas and
Nebraska. It was more or less frequent to common in all parts of Indiana
in well drained rich soils.

=Remarks.=--This tree is frequently called black walnut. On account of
the many excellent qualities of the wood, the walnut has been a choice
timber tree from pioneer days to the present. It served the pioneer for
rails, and in his buildings for sleepers, rafters, interior finish,
furniture, etc. It soon sprung into commercial importance, and has been
used for almost everything for which wood is used. Indiana and Ohio have
furnished the greatest amount of walnut. The supply of lumber from old
forest-grown trees has become so scarce that it is sought in old
buildings, rail fences, old stumps and old furniture has been worked
over. That the demand for walnut timber will not cease is assured; this
should encourage land owners to grow this tree. It is adapted to a
moist, rich, deep soil and will do well in such a habitat in all parts
of the State. Where such land is set aside for forestry purposes, no
better tree could be used for planting. Since the tree develops a long
tap root which makes it difficult to transplant, it is recommended that
the nuts be stratified in the fall, and the germinated nuts be planted
in April or May. The foliage of the walnut is often attacked by the
"tent caterpillar" which can be easily destroyed by burning about sun
down when the larvæ collect in a bunch on or near the trunk of the tree.
Since the nut of the walnut is of considerable commercial value, it is
recommended that the walnut be planted along fences, about orchards and
as one of the species in windbreaks.


=2. CÀRYA.= The Hickories.

Trees with hard, tight or scaly bark; leaflets alternate, odd-pinnate,
glandular-dotted beneath; leaflets serrate, usually unequal at the base,
the lateral sessile or nearly so, the terminal short-stalked, the lowest
pair the smallest, upper pair and terminal the largest, bruised leaflets
characteristically aromatic; staminate flowers in slender catkins,
anthers hairy; pistillate flowers in small clusters; fruit a bony nut
contained in a woody husk which separates more or less completely from
the nut into four parts.

[Illustration: Plate 21.

JUGLANS NIGRA Linnæus. Black Walnut. (× 1/2.)]

There are now recognized[14] fifteen species and several varieties of
hickory, all of which grow in the United States east of the Rocky
Mountains. Hickory grows in no other place in the world, except one
species in northern Mexico. The wood of the different species of hickory
is not of equal commercial value, but the wood of the commercial species
heads the list of Indiana woods for strength, toughness and resiliency.

The individuals of the several species vary much in respect to their
bark, size and pubescence of the twigs, number and size of the leaflets,
size and shape of the nuts. No attempt will be made to deal with all of
the extreme forms, and only those reported by Heimlich[15] and
Sargent[16] will be discussed.

  Bud scales 4-6, valvate (in pairs), leaflets generally
      curved backward.

    Leaflets 9-17, generally about 13; nut elongated,
        circular in cross-section; kernel sweet           1 C. illinoensis.

    Leaflets 5-9, generally 5-7; nut about as broad as
        long, compressed in cross-section; kernel bitter  2 C. cordiformis.

  Bud scales more than 6, imbricated (not in pairs);
      leaflets not curved backward.

    Branchlets usually stout; terminal buds large, 7-25 mm.
        long; the year's growth usually more or less hairy;
        dry husks 4-10 mm. thick.

      Prevailing number of leaflets 5                     3 C. ovata.

      Prevailing number of leaflets more than 5.

        Trees of low ground; bark of young trees tight and
            light, of older trees scaly, separating into
            long thin plates; branchlets usually light
            orange color; nuts usually large, compressed,
            3-6 cm. long, pointed at base                 4 C. laciniosa.

        Trees of high ground; bark of young trees tight
            and dark, of older trees tight and deeply
            furrowed, the thick ridges broken into short
            lengths which on very old trees loosen at the
            base; branchlets reddish-brown; nuts usually
            about half as large as the preceding and
            usually with a rounded base                   5 C. alba.

    Branchlets usually slender; terminal buds small,
        5-12 mm. long; the year's growth usually glabrous,
        rarely hairy; dried husk 1-2.5 mm. thick.

      Branchlets and leaves not covered when they first
          appear with rusty-brown pubescence.

        Prevailing number of leaflets 5; fruit usually
            smooth and tapering at base to a short stem
            (fig-like); shell of nut thick, kernel sweet
            and astringent                                6 C. glabra.

        Prevailing number of leaflets generally 7; fruit
            usually granular, rarely tapering at the base
            to a short stem (fig-like); shell of nut
            thin, kernel sweet without astringency        7 C. ovalis.

    Branchlets and leaves densely covered when they first
        appear with rusty-brown pubescence                8 C. Buckleyi.

=1.= =Carya illinoénsis= (Wangenheim) K. Koch. Pecan. Plate 22. Very
tall slender trees up to 15 dm. in diameter; bark tight, sometimes
becoming scaly on very old trees, fissured, ridges narrow, ashy-brown
tinged with red; twigs at first hairy, becoming smooth or nearly so and
reddish-brown by the end of the season; leaves 3-5 dm. long; leaflets
9-17, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, somewhat curved backward, 7-15 cm.
long, taper-pointed, hairy when they unfold, becoming at maturity smooth
or nearly so, dark green above, and a yellow-green beneath; clusters of
staminate catkins sessile; fruit single or in small clusters, oblong
3.5-6 cm. long, the winged sutures extending to the base, the husk
splitting to below the middle; nut ovoid-oblong, reddish-brown; wood
heavy, hard and not strong.

=Distribution.=--In the Mississippi Valley from Indiana and Iowa south
to Texas. In Indiana it was a native of the southwest part of the State.
It was a common tree in the river bottoms of Point Township of Posey
County, and in the bottoms of the southwest part of Gibson County. It
was found more or less frequently in the bottoms of the Wabash Valley,
as far north as to within four miles of Covington where the author
collected specimens in 1918. It followed the bottoms of the Ohio River
east at least as far as Clark County. Michaux[17] gives it as rare in
the vicinity of Louisville. Victor Lyons of Jeffersonville says that it
was a native to the east part of Survey 29 of the Illinois Grant, and
one tree in the northwest corner of No. 32; and there were nine trees
9-10 dm. in diameter in Floyd County on "Loop Island". A large tree grew
in the bottoms near Bethlehem in Clark County, which is said to have
been a native.

Young[18] says that there are two trees in Jefferson County, one
planted, the other probably native. Coulter[19] says "there are several
trees in the river bottoms."

[Illustration: Plate 22.

CARYA ILLINOENSIS (Wangenheim) K. Koch. Pecan. (× 1/2.)

The two nuts to right are from the McCallister hybrid pecan tree.]

There are several trees on the Elisha Golay farm about one mile east of
Vevay which are in rows, which show that they were planted. The largest
has a trunk 2.2 m. long and a circumference of 31 dm. It followed the
north fork of White River as far as Greene County, and the south fork of
White River as far as Seymour. A pioneer told me he remembered a small
colony in the eastern part of Washington County in the bottoms near the
Muscatatuck River. In Indiana it is found only in very low land which is
subject to overflow.

=Remarks.=--So far as the wood is concerned, the pecan is the poorest of
all hickories. It has only about one-half the strength and stiffness of
the shellbark hickory. Although the wood is inferior, the pecan has the
distinction of producing the best nut of any native tree of America. The
pecan was well known to the Indians, and some authors say the range of
the species was extended by planting by the Indians. It has been a nut
of commerce ever since the area of its range has been settled. It was
planted by the pioneers, and recently nurserymen took up the subject of
growing stock by budding and grafting from superior trees. At present
there are about 100 horticultural varieties. The horticulturist has
developed forms twice the size of the native nuts, and with shells so
thin as to be styled "paper-shelled." The pecan has been extensively
planted for commercial purposes in the southern states, but information
obtained from owners of pecan trees in Indiana indicate that the winters
are too severe for profitable pecan culture in Indiana. During the
winter of 1917-18 the whole of a tract of 13 year old pecan trees on the
Forest Reserve in Clark County was killed back to the ground. In Noble
County about one mile south of Wolf Lake is a tree planted about 50
years ago that is about 9 dm. in circumference that frequently sets nuts
but they never mature on account of the early frosts.

=2.= =Carya cordifórmis= (Wangenheim) K. Koch. Pignut Hickory. Plate 23.
Large tall trees with tight bark, usually a light gray, sometimes
darker, fissures shallow and very irregular; twigs at first green,
somewhat hairy, soon becoming smooth or nearly so, and a
yellowish-brown, or reddish-brown by the end of the season; leaves and
leaflets variable, the prevailing type of trees have smaller leaves with
long and narrow leaflets, the unusual form has larger leaves up to 4 dm.
in length with terminal leaflets up to 2 dm. in length and 8.5 cm. in
width, and the last pair almost as large; fruit subglobose or rarely
oblong, 2-3.5 cm. long; wings of sutures extending to below the middle,
rarely one reaching the base; husk about 1.5 mm. thick, tardily
separating to about the middle; nut ovoid or oblong, slightly flattened
laterally, often as wide or wider than long, depressed, obcordate, with
a short or long point at the apex, ovoid or rounded at the base, smooth
or rarely with four distinct ridges; shell very thin and brittle; kernel
very bitter; wood heavy, very hard, strong, tough and close-grained. It
has about 92 per cent of the strength and about 73 per cent of the
stiffness of shellbark hickory.

[Illustration: Plate 23.

CARYA CORDIFORMIS (Wangenheim) K. Koch. Pignut Hickory. (× 1/2.)

The nuts are from different trees to show variation.]

=Distribution.=--Valley of the St. Lawrence River west to Nebraska and
south to the Gulf States. In Indiana a map distribution of the species
in the State shows that it has been found in practically all of the
counties on the west, north and east borders. It is usually found in
rich soil along streams and in rich woods, and may be found in all of
the counties of the State. Despite the fact that no animal agency was
active against the propagation of this tree, it was rarely found more
than as an infrequent tree throughout our range.

=Remarks.=--The hickories as a class, except the pecan, can not stand
"civilization," especially much tramping about the base. It appears that
the pignut hickory is the most easily affected. In Parke County about
Coxville great numbers of the trees have been killed by the borers. For
the uses of the wood see shellbark hickory. Since this species does not
produce as much marketable lumber as the shellbark hickory, and the nuts
are valueless, it should not be recommended for planting in the farmer's
woodlot. The rossed bark of this species is preferred by manufacturers
of split-bottomed chairs, and is known by them as "yellow-bud" hickory.

=3.= =Carya ovàta= (Miller) K. Koch. Shellbark Hickory. Plate 24. Large
and very tall trees; bark of young trees tight, beginning to scale when
the trees reach 1-2 dm. in diameter, separating into long thin strips on
old trees; twigs at the end of the season usually stout, 3-5 mm. in
diameter near the tip, but some are slender and as small as 2.5 mm. in
diameter, at first covered with hairs, becoming smooth at the end of the
season or remaining hairy, reddish-brown; winter buds hairy, the
terminal one on vigorous shoots long-ovoid, outer scales sharp-pointed;
ordinary leaves 2-4 dm. long; leaflets 3-5, the lateral sessile or
nearly so, the terminal one on a stalk about 1 dm. long, up to 10 cm.
wide and 22 cm. long, leaflets variable in shape from ovate to oval,
oblong-oval or obovate, all long taper-pointed, hairy beneath when they
unfold and remaining hairy until maturity or sometimes becoming almost
glabrous; fruit variable in size, 3-6 cm. long, usually subglobose,
furrowed along the sutures at least near the outer end; husk freely
splitting to the base, except one tree which was noted where the husk
remains on the nut, rarely opening for only a short distance at the
apex, very variable in thickness from 4-10 mm.; nut exceedingly
variable, compressed, 4-angled, the angles generally visible to the
base, 2-3 cm. long, more or less pointed, rarely rounded at the base or
obcordate at the apex, generally ovate to oval in outline, some almost
freakish in shape; shell generally thin; kernel sweet; wood heavy, very
hard and strong, close-grained, light brown, sap wood white and thin on
old trees.

[Illustration: Plate 24.

CARYA OVATA (Miller) K. Koch. Shellbark Hickory. (× 1/2.)

The nuts are from different trees to show variation.]

=Distribution.=--Quebec west to southern Minnesota, Kansas and eastern
Texas, thence eastward to the Atlantic through the north part of the
Gulf States. It is frequent to common in all parts of Indiana except on
the hills of the southern part. It prefers rich moist soil and is
generally found in bottom lands or on rolling land, and if in dryer
situations on the sides of hills. It is generally associated with red
oak, big shellbark hickory, swamp white oak, sweet gum, linn, white ash,
slippery elm, sugar maple, beech, etc. In the forest it is a tall
straight tree with few main branches for a crown. No tree carries its
taper better than this species. When grown in the open the side branches
do not shade off, and it grows to a medium height with a wide spreading
crown.

=Remarks.=--The writer has one specimen from Wells County which no doubt
should be referred to this species, but the description has not been
drawn to cover it. The twigs are very slender and pubescent; the leaves
are normal and pubescent; the fruit is obovoid, 2-4 cm. long; husk less
than 1 mm. thick at outer end and 2 mm. thick at the base; nut obovoid,
1-8 cm. long, little compressed, rounded at the base, rounded at the
apex, slightly angled, angles obscure on lower half; otherwise as the
type.

The species is very variable and no dependence can be placed upon such
characters as pubescence of the twigs, leaves or fruit, size of the
twigs, color of the anthers, size or shape of the nuts.

The wood of the shellbark and the big shellbark hickories is the most
used of all the hickories because it is generally freer from knots and
blemishes. Hickory is used principally for carriage and wagon stock,
agricultural implements, handles and fuel. The supply of hickory is fast
waning, and in the near future will be limited.

The hickories are very slow growing trees. They develop a long tap root,
hence are hard to transplant. Hickory should constitute an important
part of the woodlot. If this species is not well represented, germinated
nuts should be planted. The nut of this species usually sells for $3.00
to $5.00 per bushel, which should encourage land owners to plant it in
the open along fences and about the orchard. It should be remembered
that hickory will not stand much tramping by stock.

=3a.= =Carya ovata= variety =fraxinifòlia= Sargent. Trees and Shrubs
2:207:1913. Is described as having leaflets lanceolate to slightly
oblanceolate, acuminate, thick and firm in texture, lustrous above,
pubescent along the midribs below, the terminal 1.4-1.5 dm. long from
4.4-5 cm. wide, and raised on a slender puberulous petiolule, the
lateral leaflets unsymmetrical at the base, sessile, those of the
lowest pair 7-9 cm. long, and from 2.5-3 cm. wide. Sargent[20] says
"this variety occurs in Indiana," basing his authority upon my specimens
of which he has duplicates. Heimlich[21] reports this variety from White
County, and at the same time he reported the variety from Daviess,
Martin and Wells Counties, based upon specimens collected by the author
and determined by Sargent. I have carefully studied the specimens from
Daviess, Martin and Wells Counties, and they do not agree with Sargent's
description of the variety. While most of the leaves of the specimens in
question agree with the description, some do not, which excludes it from
the variety.

=3b.= =Carya ovata= variety =Nuttallii= Sargent. Trees and Shrubs
2:207:1913. This variety is described as having "nut rounded, obcordate
or rarely pointed at apex, rounded or abruptly pointed at the base, much
compressed, prominently angled, about 1.5 cm. long and 1-1.2 cm. thick;
the involucre 4-10 mm. thick, splits freely to the base. Except in size
of the fruit there appears to be no character by which the variety can
be distinguished from the common Shagbark." Heimlich[22] reported this
variety from Dekalb County, based upon specimens collected by the author
and determined by Sargent. The nuts of the specimens from Dekalb County
are 2 cm. long. The author has specimens from Wells County that agree
with the description.

=4.= =Carya laciniòsa= (Michaux filius) Loudon. Big Shellbark Hickory.
Plate 25. Large tall trees with trunks like those of the shellbark
hickory; bark of young trees tight, beginning to scale when the trees
reach a diameter of 1-2 dm., on older trees separating and scaling off
into long thin narrow strips; twigs at the end of the season stout, 4-7
mm. thick near the tip, the twigs of the season hairy at first, becoming
glabrous or nearly so by the end of autumn, yellowish or late in autumn
a rusty brown, frequently retaining the leaf-stalks of the leaves of the
previous season until spring which is peculiar to this species; terminal
buds large, ovoid to ovoid-oblong, 10-25 mm. long; ordinary leaves 3-5
dm. long; leaflets 5-9, prevailing number 7, ovate to oblong-lanceolate
or obovate, the largest 1-2 dm. long, velvety beneath when they unfold
and remaining hairy beneath until maturity, rarely nearly glabrous;
fruit ovate, subglobose, oblong or obovate, 3.5-7 cm. long; dry husk
3.5-11 mm. thick; nut variable, generally much compressed, up to 5.5 cm.
long, usually circular in outline, but varying from ovate to obovate and
oblong, usually each side has 2 or 3 ridges which extend more or less
often to the base; shell very thick; kernel sweet; wood and uses same as
that of the shellbark hickory.

[Illustration: Plate 25.

CARYA LACINIOSA (Michaux filius) Loudon. Big Shellbark Hickory. (× 1/2.)

The nuts are from different trees to show variation.]

=Distribution.=--Southwestern Ontario south to Alabama and west to
Louisiana, Nebraska and Iowa. Found throughout Indiana, except there are
as yet no records from the extreme northwest counties. It is frequent to
common in moist rich woods, or in river bottoms which is its favorite
habitat. It is usually associated with the shellbark hickory where it
grows in moist situations. Sometimes in the river bottoms it grows in
situations too wet for the shellbark hickory. In the lower Wabash
bottoms it becomes a common tree.

=Remarks.=--This hickory is also known as the big scaly-bark hickory and
hard-head hickory. The nuts are an article of commerce and by some are
preferred to the shellbark hickory although the nuts are hard to crack.
This objection is easily overcome by wetting the nuts, and drying them
by using heat which cracks the shell, making them easy to crack.

=5.= =Carya álba= (Linnæus) K. Koch. White Hickory. Plate 26. Medium
sized tall trees up to 10 dm. in diameter; bark tight, of two types, one
light colored, thin and fissured into a network. This form has been seen
only in the river bottoms of the southwestern part of the State. The
common type of bark is thick, with thick ridges, dark but on the older
trees it weathers to a light gray and becomes thickly covered with
lichens; terminal twigs of branches at end of season stout, 3.5-7 mm. in
diameter near the tip, densely hairy at first and remaining hairy
throughout the season or becoming almost glabrous, reddish-brown;
terminal bud large, ovate, 10-20 mm. long; ordinary leaves 2-4 dm. long,
the rachis and under side of leaflets densely hairy when they unfold,
remaining pubescent until maturity; leaflets 5-9, prevailing number 7,
long-oval, ovate-lanceolate, or obovate; fruit usually globose, more
rarely short elliptic, ovate or obovoid, the husk rather tardily opening
to nearly the base, or only checking open at the top; dried husk 3-8 mm.
thick; nut variable in shape, little compressed, somewhat globose, a
little longer than wide, more rarely wider than long or short elliptic,
usually 2.5-3.5 cm. long, generally rounded at the base and
short-pointed at the apex, more rarely pointed at the base and long
pointed at the apex, (one specimen is at hand that is almost a square
box), usually with 4-6 angles, on some forms obscure; shell thick;
kernel very small, sweet; wood and uses same as shellbark hickory.

[Illustration: Plate 26.

CARYA ALBA (Linnæus) K. Koch. White Hickory. (× 1/2.)

The nuts are from different trees to show variation.]

=Distribution.=--Southwestern Ontario south to the Gulf and west to
Texas, Missouri and Iowa. Found throughout Indiana, except there are no
records from the extreme northwestern counties. This species except in
the lower Wabash Valley is confined to the uplands. It is rather a rare
tree in northern Indiana, but becomes more or less frequent in the
western part of the State south of the Wabash River and more or less
frequent to common on the hills in all of the State south of Marion
County. It is most abundant in the unglaciated area.

=Remarks.=--This species is called mockernut by text books, and bull
hickory in the vicinity of New Albany.

=5a.= =Carya alba= variety =subcoriàcea= Sargent. Trees and Shrubs
2:207:1913. Only one tree of this variety is known in Indiana and it is
located in Posey County on the bank of the cypress swamp about 13 miles
southwest of Mt. Vernon. Specimens from this tree were sent to Sargent
and he referred them to this variety.[23] It differs from the type in
the larger size and shape of the fruit and nut. The dried fruit is 5 cm.
long, oblong. The nut is oblong, 4.4 cm. long, pointed at both ends, or
some nuts somewhat ovate in shape and more rounded at the base, little
compressed and strongly angled; shell very thick, 5 mm. at the thinnest
place; kernel very small and sweet. The nut easily distinguishes it from
all forms of hickory. The author has bought hickory nuts for table use
for several years from Posey County and this nut is frequently found in
the assortment which shows that this variety is more or less frequent in
that section.

=6.= =Carya glàbra= (Miller) Spach. Black Hickory. Plate 27. Very tall
medium sized trees, up to 7 dm. in diameter; bark tight, usually dark,
fissures shallow on some and quite deep on others; twigs reddish-brown,
glabrous, terminal buds small, ovoid, about 7-12 mm. long; ordinary
leaves 2-3 dm. long; leaflets generally lanceolate, sometimes quite
wide, or wider beyond the middle, prevailing number 5, the terminal
usually 11-19 cm. long, somewhat pubescent on unfolding, more or less
pubescent below at maturity, usually only the midrib, axils and larger
veins with hairs; fruit generally smooth and obovoid, rarely globose or
oval, 22-40 mm. long; husk sometimes not opening, more often one or more
of the sutures open to less than half way, 1-2 mm. thick; nut about
20-30 mm. long and 16-25 mm. wide, rounded at the apex, elongated and
rounded at the base, angles wanting or obscure; shell very hard and
thick, about 1.5 mm. thick at the thinnest point; kernel sweet and
astringent; wood and uses same as that of the shellbark hickory.

[Illustration: Plate 27.

CARYA GLABRA (Miller) Spach. Black Hickory. (× 1/2.)

Fruit from different trees to show variation.]

=Distribution.=--Southern Ontario south to the Gulf States and west to
Texas and Iowa. This species is reported for all parts of the State.
However, the records for the northern counties were made when this
species was not separated from _Carya ovalis_, and since the latter
species is quite frequent in the northern counties it is best to refer
the early records to _Carya ovalis_. The most northern station based
upon an existing specimen is the north side of the Mississinewa River
east of Eaton in Delaware County. It is a frequent, common to very
common tree on the hills in the southern part of the State. It has its
mass distribution in the unglaciated part of the State, although it is
locally a frequent to a common tree of the hills of the other southern
counties. It appears that this species has the ability to invade areas
after the virgin forest is cut, and it is not an uncommon sight to see
this species in almost pure stands on the hills of cut-over lands.

=Remarks.=--This species is often called pignut. Sargent wisely suggests
that this name be used exclusively for _Carya cordiformis_. The great
abundance of this species in Brown, Morgan and Monroe Counties has been
instrumental in building up a large business in the manufacture of
hickory chairs and furniture. Frames of furniture are made from the very
young trees, and backs and seats from the bark of old trees, which are
cut, stripped of their bark, and often left to rot.

=6a.= =Carya glabra= variety =megacárpa= Sargent[24]. This variety was
reported for Indiana by Heimlich.[25] His report was based on a specimen
collected by the author in Franklin County. It was named by Sargent who
has a duplicate specimen. Sargent in his revision of the hickories does
not include Indiana in its range. The size of the fruit is the character
that marks the variety and I do not believe this is sufficient to
warrant its separation. I have, therefore, included all Indiana forms
under the type.

=7.= =Carya ovàlis= (Wangenheim) Sargent. Small-fruited Hickory. Plate
28. Medium sized tall trees; bark usually tight on the trunk for a
distance up to 1.5-3 m., then becoming more or less scaly like the
shellbark hickory, on some trees the bark is very thick and is quite
scaly but it does not flake off in thin plates as the shellbark hickory;
twigs purplish or reddish-brown, generally smooth by the end of the
season, generally 3-4 mm. thick near the tip; terminal winter buds
ovoid, 7-10 mm. long, covered with yellow scales and more or less
pubescent; average size leaves 2-3 dm. long; leaflets 3-7, prevailing
number usually 7, sometimes 5, usually lanceolate, frequently oval or
slightly obovate, the terminal 12-21 cm. long, at maturity usually
pubescent beneath in the axils of the veins, more rarely also the veins
covered with hairs; fruit varies greatly in size and shape, the most
common form is obovoid, more rarely oval, or subglobose, 25-42 mm. in
length, granular and covered with yellow scales; husk usually splitting
to the base, although tardily on some, often quite aromatic, dry husk
1.1-3 mm. thick; nut variable in size and shape, from elliptic to
obovoid, 15-30 mm. long, compressed, generally about 20 per cent wider
than thick, usually rounded at the base, generally slightly obovoid with
the apex rounded, or obcordate; a common form has the four sides
rounded, as wide as long or almost so, with the ends abruptly rounded so
as to appear almost truncate, the elliptic form with both ends pointed
is our rarest and smallest form; the surface on all forms is quite
smooth, except the elliptic forms which have the angles usually
extending from the tip to the base, on other forms the nuts are usually
not prominently angled and on some the angles are very obscure except at
the apex; shell usually thin, 1-1.5 mm. thick; kernel sweet; wood and
uses the same as that of the shellbark hickory.

[Illustration: Plate 28.

CARYA OVALIS (Wangenheim) Sargent. Small-fruited Hickory. (× 1/2.)

The nuts show the species and its varieties.]

Sargent[26] has described five varieties of this species, three of which
he credits to Indiana. The writer has sent him specimens from over 100
trees of this species, and he has variously distributed them to the type
and varieties. Heimlich has reported Sargent's determination of many of
these specimens in the Proc. Ind. Acad. Science, 1917:436-439:1918. The
writer cannot agree with the determinations and believes further field
study is necessary to discover characters by which the several forms can
consistently be divided.

To stimulate the study of this species, the original description of the
varieties together with Sargent's characterization of the type are
quoted because they are contained in a book not usually found in
libraries. To these descriptions are added new characters which Sargent
gives in his revision of the hickories in Bot. Gaz. 66:245-247:1918.

=Carya ovalis= (type).

"In the shape of the fruit and in the thickness of its involucre this
tree is of four distinct forms; in all of them the involucre splits
freely to the base, or nearly to the base, the shell of the nut is thin
and the seed, although small, is sweet and edible. The extremes of these
forms are very distinct, but there are forms which are intermediate
between them, so that it is difficult to decide sometimes to which of
the forms these intermediate forms should be referred. The first of
these forms, as the fruit agrees with Wangenheim's figure, must be
considered the type of the species. The fruit is oval, narrowed and
rounded at the base, acute at the apex, usually from 2.5-3 cm. long and
about 1.5 cm. in diameter. The involucre is from 2-2.5 mm. thick and
occasionally one of the sutures remains closed. The nut is oblong,
slightly flattened, rounded at the base, acute or acuminate and
four-angled at the apex, the ridges extending for one-third or rarely
for one-half of its length, from 2-2.5 cm. long and about 1.5 cm. in
diameter. The shell is usually about 1 mm. thick." "The type of this
species and its varieties have glabrous or rarely slightly pubescent
leaves, with usually 7 thin leaflets."

=7a.= =Carya ovalis= variety =obcordàta= (Muhlenberg) Sargent. "The
fruit varies from subglobose to short-oblong or to slightly obovate,
showing a tendency to pass into that of the other varieties of the
species. It varies from 2-3 cm. in diameter, and the involucre, which is
from 2-5 mm. thick, splits freely to the base or nearly to the base by
narrowly winged sutures, one of them rarely extending only to the middle
of the fruit. The nut is usually much compressed, often broadest above
the middle, slightly angled sometimes to below the middle, rounded at
the base and much compressed, often broadest above the middle, slightly
angled sometimes to below the middle, rounded at the base and rounded
and often more or less obcordate at the apex."

=7b.= =Carya ovalis= variety =odoràta= (Marshall) Sargent. "The name may
have been given by Marshall to this variety on account of the strong
resinous odor of the inner surface of the fresh involucre of the fruit,
which I have not noticed in that of the other forms. The fruit is
subglobose or sometimes slightly longer than broad, flattened and
usually from 1.3-1.5 cm. in diameter. The involucre varies from 1-1.5
mm. in thickness and splits freely to the base by distinctly winged
sutures. The nut is rounded or acute at the base with a short point,
rounded at the apex, very slightly or not at all ridged, pale colored,
from 1.2-1.5 cm. long and wide and from 1-1.2 cm. thick."

=7c.= =Carya ovalis= variety =obovàlis= Sargent. "In the fourth form the
fruit is more or less obovate, about 2.5 cm. long and 2 cm. in diameter,
and the involucre varies from 2-4 mm. in thickness. The nut is much
compressed, pointed or rounded at the apex, rounded at the base, usually
about 2 cm. long, nearly as broad and about 1.5 cm. thick." "The fruit
resembles in shape that of _Carya glabra_, but the involucre is thicker
and splits easily to the base or nearly to the base."

=7d.= =Carya ovalis= variety =obcordàta=, =f. vestita= Sargent. Bot.
Gaz. 66:246:1918. This is a form described from a specimen collected by
the author on the border of Dan's Pond in Knox County. It differs from
"the variety _obcordata_ in the thick tomentose covering of the
branchlets during their first year. The leaves of this form are slightly
pubescent in the autumn on the under surface of the midribs. Although
the nuts are more compressed than those of the ordinary forms of var.
_obcordata_, the fruit is of that variety. The branchlets are unusually
stout for a form of _Carya ovalis_ and are covered with rusty tomentum
during their first year and are more or less pubescent in their second
and third seasons."

=Distribution.=--Western New York west to Illinois and south to North
Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas and Missouri. The
species is found in all parts of the State, although the distribution of
the varieties has not been worked out. The habitat of this species is
high ground, and only rarely is it found in low ground. It prefers
hills, slopes, base of the terraces of streams, and in the northern part
of the State gravelly ridges and sandy soil. In all of its range it is
usually associated with white and black oak. It is infrequent in the
southern part of the State but north of the Wabash River it becomes more
frequent and in some places it becomes common to very common. It is a
common tree in Wells County north of the Wabash River and in the
northern part of Lagrange County, and in both places a wide range of
forms occur, some of which are not covered by the preceding description.
No one of our trees offers a better opportunity for intensive study than
this hickory.

=Remarks.=--Text books call this species the small-fruited hickory. It
is not commonly distinguished from the other hickories, but in Wells
County where it is common the boys call it "Ladies' Hickory."

=8.= =Carya Búckleyi= variety =arkansàna= Sargent.[27] Plate 29. Medium
sized trees, bark tight, dark, deeply furrowed; mature twigs more or
less pubescent, reddish brown; terminal buds ovoid, about 8 mm. long,
thickly covered with yellow scales, and more or less pubescent; leaves
2-3.5 dm. long, rachis permanently pubescent; leaflets 5-7, prevailing
number 7, lanceolate, terminal one about 15 cm. long, tawny pubescent on
unfolding, more or less glabrous at maturity; fruit ellipsoid to
slightly obovoid, very aromatic, about 3.5-4 cm. long, covered with
yellow scales; husk usually splitting to below the middle, 3-4 mm.
thick; nut oblong to slightly obovoid, 3-3.5 cm. long, scarcely
compressed, rounded at each end, the four ridges faint except at the
apex; shell thick, about 2 mm. at the thinnest point; kernel sweet; wood
same as the white hickory which it most closely resembles.

=Distribution.=--Southwestern Indiana, south in the Mississippi Valley
to Louisiana and Texas. Known in Indiana only from one tree in Knox
County on the sand ridge on the east side of what was formerly a cypress
swamp, about two miles north of Decker. The soil is the Knox sand. It is
associated with black and black jack oaks.

=Remarks.=--The description has been drawn from ample material from this
single tree.

[Illustration: Plate 29.

CARYA BUCKLEYI var. ARKANSANA Sargent. (× 1/2.)]




=BETULÀCEAE.= The Birch Family.


Trees or shrubs with simple, petioled, alternate (in pairs on the older
branches of _Betula_) leaves; staminate flowers in long drooping
catkins, 1-3 in the axil of each bract, the pistillate in short lateral
or terminal aments; fruit a nut or samara.

  Staminate flowers solitary in the axil of each bract,
      without a calyx, pistillate flowers with a calyx;
      nut wingless.

    Bark of tree smooth; staminate aments in winter enclosed
        in bud scales; nut exposed, its subtending bract
        more or less irregularly 3-cleft                    1 Carpinus.

    Bark of older trees shreddy; staminate aments in winter
        naked; nut enclosed in a bladder-like bract         2 Ostrya.

  Staminate flowers 3-6 in the axil of each bract, with a
      calyx, pistillate flowers without a calyx; nut winged.

    Winter buds sessile; stamens 2; fruit membranous and
        hop-like; fruiting bract deciduous at the end of
        the season when the nut escapes                     3 Betula.

    Winter buds stalked; stamens 4; fruit woody and
        cone-like; fruiting bracts woody and persisting
        after the nuts escape                               4 Alnus.


=1. CARPÌNUS.= The Hornbeam.

=Carpinus caroliniàna= Walter. Water Beech. Blue Beech. Plate 30. A
small tree up to 3 dm. in diameter, usually 1-1.5 dm. in diameter with
fluted or ridged trunks; bark smooth, close, gray; twigs hairy at first,
soon becoming glabrous; leaves ovate-oblong, average leaves 6-10 cm.
long, pointed at the apex, double-serrate, hairy when young, glabrous at
maturity except on the veins and in the axils beneath, pubescent, not
glandular, staminate catkins appearing in early spring; nut at the base
of a 3-cleft bract about 2 cm. long, nut broadly ovate, compressed,
pointed and about 5 mm. long; wood heavy, hard, tough and strong.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia west to Minnesota and south to Florida and
Texas. In Indiana it is frequent to common throughout the State in moist
rich woods. It prefers a moist rich soil; however, it has a range from
the tamarack bog to the dry black and white oak slope. It is tolerant of
shade and is seldom found outside of the forest.

=Remarks.=--This tree is too small and crooked to be of economic
importance. It is regarded as a weed tree in the woodland, and should be
removed to give place to more valuable species.

[Illustration: Plate 30.

CARPINUS CAROLINIANA Walter. Water or Blue Beech. (× 1/2.)]


=2. ÓSTRYA.= The Hop Hornbeam.

=Ostrya virginiàna= (Miller) Willdenow. Ironwood. Plate 31. Small trees
up to 5 dm.[28] in diameter, usually about 1-2 dm. in diameter; bark
smooth and light brown on small trees, shreddy on older trees; shoots
hairy, becoming at the end of the season glabrous or nearly so and a
reddish-brown; leaves oblong-ovate, other forms rare, average size about
7-12 cm. long, acuminate, usually double-serrate, hairy on both surfaces
when they unfold, glabrous or nearly so above at maturity, more or less
pubescent beneath, especially on the midrib and veins; staminate spikes
develop in early winter; fruit hop-like about 2-4 cm. long; nut
oblong-ovate about 7 mm. long and half as wide, compressed, light brown;
wood very hard, tough, close-grained, strong, light brown.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia west to Manitoba, south to the Gulf States
and west to Texas. It is frequent to common in all of the counties of
the State. However, it is entirely absent in the lower Wabash bottoms,
except rarely on high grounds in this area. It prefers well drained dry
soil, and is most frequent when it is associated with beech and sugar
maple, although it is often quite plentiful in white oak woods. It is
shade enduring and is one of the under trees in the forest where it
grows very tall and slender and free from branches. When it grows in
exposed places such as bluffs, it retains its side branches and is
usually bushy.

=Remarks.=--The trees are too small to be of much economic importance.
It is 30 per cent stronger than white oak, and 46 per cent more elastic.
These exceptional qualities were recognized by the Indians and it was
used by them where wood of great strength and hardness was desired.
Likewise the pioneer used it where he could for handles, wooden wedges,
etc. Since it grows neither large nor fast, it is usually regarded as a
weed tree in the woodland, and should be removed to give place to more
valuable species.

=Ostrya virginiàna= variety =glandulòsa= Spach. This is the name given
to the form which has the twigs, petioles, peduncles and often the
midrib and veins of the leaves beneath covered more or less with short
erect, reddish, glandular hairs.

It is found with the species, but is not so frequent.

[Illustration: Plate 31.

OSTRYA VIRGINIANA (Miller) K. Koch. Ironwood. (× 1/2.)]


=3. BÉTULA.= The Birches.

Trees and shrubs with bark tight, scaly or separating into very thin
plates and peeling off transversely, whitish or dark colored; staminate
catkins developing in autumn and dehiscing in early spring before or
with the appearance of the leaves, pistillate catkins ovoid or
cylindric; fruit a small winged flat seed, bearing at the apex the two
persistent stigmas.

  Bark of twigs usually with a slight wintergreen flavor;
      leaves with 7-15, usually 9-11 pairs of prominent
      veins; rounded or slightly cordate at the base;
      fertile catkins generally 10 mm. or more in
      diameter.                                           1 B. lutea.

  Bark of twigs usually bitter, not wintergreen flavored;
      leaves with 4-11, usually 4-9 pairs of prominent
      veins, more or less obtusely angled at the base;
      fertile catkins generally less than 10 mm. in
      diameter (rarely 10 mm. or more, _B. nigra_).

    Bark of trunk chalky-white; fruiting aments drooping
        or spreading.

      Bark below base of lateral branches darkened-triangular
          in outline; leaves long acuminate and lustrous
          above; staminate catkins usually solitary.      2 B. populifolia.

      Bark below base of lateral branches not darkened;
          leaves ovate and not lustrous above; staminate
          catkins usually 2-3.                            3 B. papyrifera.

    Bark of trunks dark; fruiting aments erect or
        nearly so.                                        4 B. nigra.

=1.= =Betula lùtea= Michaux filius. Birch. Yellow Birch. Plate 32.
Medium size trees; bark of small trees and of the branches of old trees
smooth, silver or dark gray, freely peeling off in thin strips, becoming
on older trees a dark brown, rarely tight, usually fissured into wide
plates and rolling back from one edge; the shoots of the year hairy,
greenish gray, becoming glabrous or nearly so and reddish-brown by the
end of the second year, not aromatic when bruised but when chewed
sometimes a faint wintergreen odor can be detected; winter buds pointed,
reddish-brown, the lower scales more or less pubescent, generally with a
fringe of hairs on the margins; leaves usually appearing in pairs, ovate
to ovate-oblong, 4-14 cm. long, taper-pointed, oblique and wedge-shape,
rounded or slightly cordate at the base, sharply and rather coarsely
serrate, hairy on both sides when they appear, becoming at maturity
glabrous or nearly so above, and remaining more or less pubescent below,
especially on the veins, both surfaces with few to numerous resinous
dots; petioles permanently hairy, generally 5-13 mm. long; flowers
appear in May; staminate spikes in clusters at the ends of the branches,
about 6 cm. long, scales broadly ovate, blunt, fringed with hairs,
green-tipped with a margin of reddish-brown; pistillate spikes solitary
in the axils of the leaves, mature spikes 2.5-5 cm. long, generally
2.5-3 cm. long, commonly about half as thick as long, recurved to
ascending, commonly about horizontal, sessile or on short stalks; scales
very variable, 5-11 mm. long, generally 7-8 mm. long, sometimes as wide
as long but generally about one-fourth longer than wide, densely
pubescent on the back, or rarely glabrous on the back, ciliate, glabrous
or nearly so on the inside, commonly with a few brown or black glands on
the margin, commonly lobed to more than one-third of their length, lobes
ascending or divaricate, the lateral generally the larger and almost as
long as the narrower middle lobe; nuts divested of the wings, slightly
obovate, about 3 mm. long, wings about two-thirds as wide as the nut and
usually with a fringe of hairs at the blunt apex.

[Illustration: Plate 32.

BETULA LUTEA Michaux filius. Yellow Birch. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--The distribution of this species is variously given as
from Newfoundland west to Manitoba and south in the Alleghenies to
Georgia. It is now definitely known that the species of _Betula_
hybridize which may account for the peculiar forms often encountered.
That there are geographic races or Mendelian segregates of this species
is evidenced by the different interpretations given this species by
different authors. _Betula alleghanensis_ Britton appears to be one of
them. The descriptive difference between _Betula lenta_ and _Betula
lutea_ is not clear, which has resulted in many authors crediting
_Betula lenta_ to Indiana and the area west of Indiana.

The preceding description does not agree with that of _Betula lutea_
exactly, and has been drawn to cover the specimens at hand from Indiana
which the author has from Allen, Crawford, Lagrange, Lake, Marshall,
Porter and Steuben Counties. It has recently been reported from White
County by Heimlich.[29] He says: "Specimens were taken from two trees
about two miles south of Buffalo near the water's edge of the river."
The writer has visited this locality and found here, and also on the
island above the bridge a little farther down the river, _Betula nigra_,
but could not find _Betula lutea_. Since Heimlich did not report _Betula
nigra_, which unmistakably occurs here, I assume he has confused the two
species. It is very local in its distribution, and appears to be
confined to swamps, borders of lakes, and streams in the extreme
northern part of the State. It has not been seen south of the northern
end of the State, except a few small trees found clinging to the walls
of the cliffs of a ravine about one mile east of Taswell in Crawford
County. The walls of this ravine are about 25 meters high; associated
with it were a few trees of hemlock, and on the top of the cliffs,
laurel (_Kalmia latifolia_).

Large trees of this species in Indiana are usually from 4-6 dm. in
diameter and about 15 m. high. The number in any one station is usually
few, although there were formerly patches where it was plentiful. Van
Gorder[30] reports for Noble County _Betula lenta_ which should be
transferred to this species, and he says: "There is a marsh of several
acres of birch in Section 15 of York Township." The largest area now
known is that contained in the large tamarack swamp near Mineral Springs
in Porter County. In this swamp are found tamarack and white cedar. It
was in this swamp that the writer found a peculiar form of birch which
has been determined as _Betula Sandbergi_. Since this species[31] is
recognized as a hybrid of _Betula papyrifera_ and _Betula pumila_
variety _glandulifera_, and the last parent of this hybrid is not found
in the vicinity, a discussion of this form is not presented. In the
immediate vicinity are found only _Betula lutea_ and _Betula pumila_.
_Betula papyrifera_ is found about a mile distant to the south. It is
assumed that this form is a cross between _Betula lutea_ and _Betula
pumila_.

=2.= =Betula populifòlia= Marshall. Gray or White Birch. Plate 33. A
small tree; bark a chalky-white, not separating into thin layers, inner
bark orange, on the trunks of old trees nearly black; shoots at first
covered with numerous glands, becoming smooth and yellowish or
reddish-brown; leaves generally long-deltoid, average blades 3-6 cm.
long, usually long taper-pointed, truncate or nearly so at the base,
irregularly double-serrate, slightly pubescent on the veins when young,
soon becoming glabrous; fertile catkins 1.5-3 cm. long and about 7 mm.
in diameter; bracts of eastern trees differ from those of Indiana trees
which are about 3-4 mm. long, lobed to about 1/3 of the distance from
the apex, lateral lobes the largest and strongly divaricate, puberulent
on the back; seed strongly notched at the apex; nut slightly obovoid;
wings much broader than the nut.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia west to southern Ontario and south to
Delaware and Pennsylvania. In Indiana it has been reported from Lake,
Laporte, Porter, St. Joseph and Tippecanoe Counties. There may be some
doubt about the Tippecanoe record, since many of the older records were
made from cultivated trees. The numbers of the species in Indiana were
always limited. It is not able to meet changed conditions and it has
already almost disappeared from our area. I was told that formerly this
species was found all about a lake in Laporte County, but it has all
died out. Its appearance in Indiana is peculiar since it is not found
west of us, or north in Michigan or east in Ohio. This small group of
trees near Lake Michigan is three or four hundred miles from the nearest
of their kind.

=Remarks.=--This species is called white and gray birch. The largest
tree seen in Indiana was about 2 dm. in diameter and 13 m. high.

[Illustration: Plate 33.

BETULA POPULIFOLIA Marshall. White or Gray Birch. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 34.

BETULA PAPYRIFERA Marshall. Paper or Canoe Birch. (× 1/2.)]

=3.= =Betula papyrífera= Marshall. Paper or Canoe Birch. Plate 34.
Rather a small tree; bark thin, creamy white; chalky, dark near the base
on old trees, separating in thin papery layers; shoots green, glandular
and hairy, becoming glabrous and reddish-brown; leaves ovate or
rhombic-ovate, acute to long taper-pointed, truncate, rounded or
wedge-shape at the base, average blades 5-8 cm. long, usually
irregularly double-serrate, hairy at first, becoming glabrous above or
nearly so, remaining more or less pubescent below, especially on the
veins and with tufts of hairs in the axils of the veins, minutely
glandular on both surfaces, sometimes with only a few glands on the
midribs above; fertile catkins 2-4 cm. long and about 6-9 mm. wide,
bracts about 4 mm. long, pubescent on both faces, lobed to about
one-third the distance from the apex, the lateral lobes the largest,
divaricate or slightly recurved; seed deeply notched at apex, nut oval,
pubescent at the apex, wings as broad as, or broader than the nut.

=Distribution.=--Alaska to Labrador, south to New York, northern
Indiana, Colorado and Washington. In Indiana it has been reported from
Lake, Laporte, Marshall and St. Joseph Counties. It has not been found
as a native in Ohio. This species is another example of a northern form
finding its southern limit near Lake Michigan.

=Remarks.=--This species in other parts of the country is known as
white, paper and canoe birch. I have not seen specimens more than 2 dm.
in diameter in Indiana.

=4.= =Betula nìgra= Linnæus. Black or Red Birch. Plate 35. A medium
sized tree; bark on young trees peeling off transversely in thin
reddish-brown strips which roll back and usually persist for several
years, bark of older trees dark brown, furrowed and separating into
short plates or peeling off in strips; young twigs hairy, becoming
glabrous and reddish at the end of the season; leaves rhombic-ovate,
acute, short and broadly wedge-shaped at the base, blades of ordinary
leaves 4-8 cm. long, irregularly toothed, glabrous above and pubescent
beneath, rarely entirely glabrous; fertile catkins generally 2-3 cm.
long, and usually slightly less than 1 cm. wide; bracts 6-10 mm. long,
pubescent, ciliate, lobed to near the middle, the lobes about equal;
nuts broadly ovate, broader than its wings, pubescent at the apex; wood
light, strong, close-grained, heart wood light brown.

=Distribution.=--Massachusetts west to Minnesota and south to Florida
and Texas. In Indiana it is found more or less frequent in the counties
bordering the Kankakee River, and as far east as St. Joseph, Marshall
and Miami Counties. Along the Kankakee River it is frequently a tree of
6-8 dm. in diameter. This species has not been found in Michigan,
northeastern Indiana or northern Ohio. It has never been noted near Lake
Michigan, and the nearest point is Cedar Lake in Lake County about 20
miles south of the Lake. It is more or less frequent along certain
streams throughout the southwestern part of the State. It is found as
far north as Putnam and Marion Counties and eastward as far as
Bartholomew, Scott and Clark Counties. There are no records for this
species for eastern Indiana or western Ohio. About Hovey Lake in Posey
County it reaches its greatest size, where trees up to 8 dm. in diameter
and 30 m. high are to be found. In the "flats" in certain parts of
Jackson and Scott Counties it becomes a common tree, associated with pin
oak and sweet gum.

[Illustration: Plate 35.

BETULA NIGRA Linnæus. Black or Red Birch. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--This is the most abundant birch of Indiana. In fact all
other species are too rare to be of economic importance. The fact that
other species of birch are so rare in Indiana, is the reason that this
species is simply called "Birch." Outside of Indiana it is known as red
birch and river birch. The principal use of this wood in this State is
for heading.

All of the birches, especially the horticultural forms, are used more or
less for ornamental planting. They are beautiful trees but are short
lived.


=4. ÁLNUS.= The Alders.

Trees or shrubs; bark astringent; staminate and pistillate catkins begin
to develop early in summer and flower the following year early in the
spring before the leaves appear; bracts of the fertile catkins thick and
woody, obdeltoid with 3-rounded lobes at the apex; nuts obovate,
reddish-brown.

  Leaves sharply double-serrate, the ends of the primary
      veins forming the apex of the larger teeth, glaucous
      beneath; nuts with a narrow thick margin              1 A. incana.

  Leaves single-serrate, pale beneath; nuts without margins 2 A. rugosa.

=1.= =Alnus incàna= (Linnæus) Muenchhausen. Speckled Alder. Plate 36.
Shrubs or small trees; bark generally smooth and a reddish-brown with a
tinge of gray, with grayish dots, hence its name; twigs hairy at first,
becoming smooth by the end of the season and a golden or reddish-brown
with many fine dark specks; leaves broadly-oval, acute or short-pointed
at apex, usually broadly rounded at the base, average blades 6.5-11 cm.
long, glaucous beneath, hairy on both sides on unfolding, at maturity
becoming glabrous above or with a few hairs on the veins, beneath
remaining more or less hairy until late in autumn when usually only the
veins are hairy; pistillate catkins resembling small cones, 1-1.5 cm.
long and usually 7-12 mm. wide, near the ends of the branches, usually
in clusters of 2-7.

[Illustration: Plate 36.

ALNUS INCANA (Linnæus) Muenchhausen. Speckled Alder. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Newfoundland to the Saskatchewan, south to New York,
northeastern Ohio, northern Indiana and Nebraska. In Indiana it is
confined to the northern tier of counties. I have specimens from
Elkhart, Lagrange, Lake and Porter Counties. It was reported from
Carroll County by Thompson, but in the absence of a verifying specimen I
am inclined to think this citation should be referred to _Alnus_
_rugosa_. This species grows in low ground on the borders of streams,
borders of swamps and in almost extinct sloughs near Lake Michigan. It
is also found along Pigeon River in the eastern part of Lagrange County.
In the vicinity of Mineral Springs in Porter County it is locally a
common shrub or tree. It has the habit of stooling out, and commonly the
several specimens will be deflected from a vertical from 20-45 degrees.
The largest specimens are from 1-1.4 dm. in diameter and about 10 m.
high.

=Remarks.=--This species could be used to good advantage in ornamental
planting in low ground. It grows rapidly, is easily transplanted and its
foliage is dense and attractive.

=2.= =Alnus rugòsa= (Du Roi) Sprengel. Smooth Alder. Plate 37. Shrubs
with fluted or angled trunks, resembling _Carpinus_; bark thin, smooth
or nearly so, reddish-brown, weathering gray; twigs hairy at first,
becoming gray or reddish-brown by the end of the season and more or less
glabrous and covered with small dark specks; leaves obovate, barely
acute or rounded at apex, wedge-shape at base, average blades 6-10 cm.
long, hairy on both surfaces while young, becoming smooth or nearly so
above, remaining more or less hairy beneath, especially on the veins,
under surface of leaves sufficiently glutinous to adhere to paper if
pressure be applied, margins set with short callous teeth, about .5-1
mm. long; fertile catkins cone-shape, 10-20 mm. long and about 7 mm. in
diameter, borne at the ends of branches in clusters of 2-5.

=Distribution.=--Maine to Minnesota, south to Florida and Texas. In
Indiana it is quite local. It has been reported in many of the counties
of northern Indiana north of the Wabash River. It has been found in
several of the southern counties and as far north as Salt Creek in
Monroe County. No reports for the central part of the State. It is
absent also in all of the eastern counties of the State, and the western
part of Ohio. It is found growing in clumps in wet woods, swamps, cold
bogs and along streams. It is usually a tall slender shrub; however, a
specimen has been seen that measured 7 cm. in diameter and 5 m. in
height.

=Remarks.=--Of no value except for ornamental planting in wet ground.




=FAGÀCEAE.= The Beech Family.


Trees with simple, alternate, petioled leaves; flowers of two kinds;
fruit a one-seeded nut. This is the most important family of trees
occurring in the State.

[Illustration: Plate 37.

ALNUS RUGOSA (Du Roi) Sprengel. Smooth Alder. (× 1/2.)]

  Winter buds long and slender, at least 4 times as long as
      wide; staminate flowers in globose heads on drooping
      peduncles; nuts sharply 3-angled                      1 Fagus.

  Winter buds not long and slender and less than 4 times as
      long as wide; staminate flowers in slender catkins;
      nuts not as above.

  Staminate catkins erect or spreading; nut flattened on
      one side and enclosed in a spiny, woody husk          2 Castanea.

  Staminate catkins drooping; nuts not flattened on one
      side, seated in a scaly, woody cup                    3 Quercus.


=1. FÀGUS.= The Beech.

=Fagus grandifòlia= Ehrhart. Beech. Plate 38. Large tall trees with bark
from light to dark gray; twigs densely covered at first with long hairs,
soon becoming glabrous and turning to a reddish-brown; terminal winter
buds about 2 cm. long; leaves ovate to ovate-oblong, long taper-pointed
to merely acute, wedge-shape to cordate at base, regularly and usually
minutely serrate, average blades 7-12 cm. long, silky when young,
becoming at maturity glabrous above and nearly so beneath except on the
veins; flowers appear in May; fruit a bur, supported on a club-shaped
pubescent peduncle about 1.5 cm. long, covered with short recurved
prickles, densely rufous-pubescent, its 4-valves enclosing the two
triangular brown nuts; nuts edible; wood very hard, strong, usually
tough, difficult to season, close-grained, takes a high polish, sap wood
white, heart wood reddish.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia, southern Ontario to Wisconsin, south to
the Gulf States and Texas. It is found in every county of the State,
although it is local in the prairie and dry sandy regions of the
northwestern part of the State. It is a frequent to a very common tree
on the high ground in many parts of the State. If the high ground and
hills of the State are not forested with white and black oak, beech is
almost certain to be the prevailing species. Wherever beech is found it
is usually a frequent to a common tree, and it is not uncommon to see
areas which are almost a pure stand of this species. It is also a
frequent to a common tree in southern Indiana in what is called the
"flats." Here it is associated with sweet gum and pin oak. On the slopes
of hills of the southern counties it is associated with a great variety
of trees. In the central part of the State its most frequent associate
is the sugar maple. In the northern counties it has a wider range of
associates, including white oak, ash, slippery elm, buckeye, ironwood,
etc. It should be added that tulip is a constant associate except in the
"flats." In point of number it ranks as first of Indiana trees.

[Illustration: Plate 38.

FAGUS GRANDIFOLIA Ehrhart. Beech. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--Specimens with the habit of retaining their branches which
lop downward, usually have thicker sap wood and are harder to split.
This form is popularly styled the white beech. The form with smooth tall
trunks with upright branches usually has more heart wood, splits more
easily and is popularly distinguished as red beech. The term yellow
beech is variously applied. This species is a large tree in all parts of
the State, although the largest specimens are found in the southeastern
part of the State. In the virgin forests trees almost 1 m. in diameter
and 30 m. high were frequent.

Beech was formerly used only for fuel, but in the last few decades it
has been cut and used for many purposes, and the supply is fast
diminishing. The beauty of this tree both in summer and winter, sunshine
or storm makes it one of the most desirable for shade tree planting, but
I have failed to find where it has been successfully used. It is one of
the few trees that does not take to domestication. When the original
forest is reduced to a remnant of beech, as a rule, the remaining beech
will soon begin to die at the top. It is difficult to transplant. When
planted the hole should be filled with earth obtained from under a
living tree, in order to introduce the mycorrhiza that is necessary to
the growth of the tree.


=2. CASTÀNEA.= The Chestnut.

=Castanea dentàta= (Marshall) Borkhausen. Chestnut. Plate 39. Large
trees with deeply fissured bark, smooth on young trees; young twigs more
or less hairy, soon becoming glabrous and a reddish-brown; leaves
lanceolate, average blades 13-22 cm. long, taper-pointed, wedge-shape or
obtuse at the base, coarsely serrate, teeth usually incurved, at
maturity glabrous on both sides; flowers appear after the leaves in the
latter part of June or early in July, the staminate catkins from the
axils of the leaves of the year's growth, 1.5-3 dm. long, pistillate
flowers in heads on short stalks in the axils of the leaves, usually on
the branch beyond the greater part of the staminate catkins; fruit a
globular spiny bur 5-7 cm. in diameter which contains the nuts; nuts
usually 1-3, rarely 5, flattened on one side, edible; wood light, soft,
not strong, checks and warps on seasoning, yellowish-brown, durable in
contact with the ground.

[Illustration: Plate 39.

CASTANEA DENTATA (Marshall) Borkhausen. Chestnut. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Maine, southern Ontario, Michigan, south to Delaware
and in the mountains to Alabama, and west to Arkansas. In Indiana it is
found locally in the south central counties. The most northern station
where I have seen trees that are native to a certainty is in Morgan
County a short distance north of Martinsville. There are a few trees on
the south bank of White River in Mound Park about 2 miles east of
Anderson. This site was formerly an Indian village, and the trees may
have been introduced here. The late A. C. Benedict formerly of the State
Geological Survey, told me he saw a colony in 1878 in Fayette County on
the farm of Dr. B. Ball, about 3 miles west of Connersville on the east
side of Little Williams Creek. The trees were at least 6 dm. in
diameter. The western line of distribution would be a line drawn from
Martinsville to a point a few miles west of Shoals and south to Tell
City.

=Remarks.=--The greatest numbers of this species are found on the
outcrops of the knobstone in Clark, Floyd, Harrison, Jackson, Lawrence,
Martin, Orange and Washington Counties. It grows on high ground,
associated with white and black oak, beech, etc. The species in all of
our area grows to be a large tree. In the Ind. Geol. Rept. 1874:70:1875
there is a reference to a "stump in Jackson County that was 9 ft. and 2
in. in diameter." This species is rather gregarious in habit, and rarely
are isolated trees found. It is quite local in its distribution, but
where found it is usually a common tree. The bark was much used in
tanning, and the timber for poles, ties and posts. The demand for this
species has led to heavy cutting, so that the present supply is
practically limited to inferior or small trees. The nut crop in this
State is usually badly infested by the weevil.

This species is easily propagated by seed or seedlings. It is
recommended for forest planting in all parts of its natural range and
other parts of the State where the soil is very sandy and free from
limestone. This species never attains to an old age when growing close
to the limestone. It grows rapidly and requires little pruning. The only
objection to planting it for forestry purposes is that it might be
infested by the chestnut bark disease which is fatal to this tree. This
disease is far to the east of us, and there are wide barriers to its
western migration. Since a chestnut grove would soon grow into post and
pole size, in the event the grove would be killed by the bark disease,
the crop could be harvested and the loss would be more of the nature of
a disappointment than a financial one. If planted in a cleared area the
seedlings should be spaced about 5 × 5 feet if no cultivation can be done.
If the trees can be cultivated, plant 7 × 7 or 8 × 8 feet and grow corn for
one or two years between the rows.


=3. QUÉRCUS.= The Oaks.

The leaves of Indiana oaks are deciduous; flowers appear in April or
May, very small, the staminate on slender pendulous catkins, the
pistillate solitary or in clusters in scaly bud-like cups; fruit an
acorn which takes one or two years to mature, ripening in September or
October. The species that mature their fruit the first year are
popularly and commercially classed as "white oaks." Those that mature
their fruit the second year are classed as "red, black or bristle-tipped
oaks."

The oaks are the largest genus of Indiana trees, and commercially are
the most important of all trees of the State. They are the longest lived
of all the trees that occur in the State, and while they have numerous
insect enemies none of them prove fatal to it, except a certain gall
insect.

Note:--In collecting leaf specimens of oaks for identification it should
be borne in mind that the foliage is quite variable. The leaves of
seedlings, coppice shoots and of vigorous shoots of old trees sometimes
vary considerably in size, form and leaf-margins. Also leaves of old
trees that grow in the shade usually have the margins more nearly entire
than the typical leaves. For example leaves may be found on the lower
and interior branches of a pin oak which are not lobed to beyond the
middle, which throws them into the red oak group.

  Bark gray, (except in No. 5) more or less scaly; mature leaves
      never with bristle tips; fruit maturing the first year.

    Mature leaves smooth beneath.                        1 Q. alba.

    Mature leaves pubescent beneath.

      Primary veins beneath show regular pinnate venation.

        Some of the primary veins beneath end in a
            sinus.                                       2 Q. bicolor.

        All primary veins beneath end in teeth of the margin.

          Tips of leaves of fruiting branches sharp-pointed,
              usually forming an acute angle; fruit
              sessile or nearly so.                      3 Q. Muhlenbergii.

          Tips of leaves of fruiting branches rounded or if
              sharp-pointed, it rarely forms an acute angle;
              fruit peduncled.

            Petioles green and woolly pubescent beneath
                (rarely almost glabrous); under surface
                of leaves velvety to the touch; bark gray,
                scaly, of the white oak type; trees of low
                ground.                                  4 Q. Michauxii.

            Petioles yellowish and smooth beneath, or rarely
                somewhat pubescent; under surface of leaves
                not velvety to the touch; bark dark, and
                tight, of the red oak type; trees of high
                ground (in Indiana confined to the
                "knobstone" area).                       5 Q. Prinus.

    Primary veins beneath show irregular venation.

      Last year's growth pubescent; acorns generally
          less than 12 mm. in diameter.                  6 Q. stellata.

      Last year's growth glabrous or nearly so; acorns more
          than 12 mm. in diameter.

          Leaves sinuate dentate, sometimes lobed near the
              base, velvety to the touch beneath; peduncles
              of fruit longer than the petioles.         2 Q. bicolor.

          Leaves irregularly lobed, harsh or rarely velvety
              or smooth to the touch beneath; peduncles of
              fruit shorter than the petioles.

            Cup of fruit fringed; apex of lobes of leaves
                generally rounded; trees of lowland.     7 Q. macrocarpa.

            Cup of fruit not fringed; apex of lobes of
                leaves generally acute; trees of swamps
                in the extreme southwestern counties of
                Indiana.                                 8 Q. lyrata.

  Bark dark, tight and furrowed; leaves with bristle
      tips; fruit maturing the second year.

    Leaves entire                                        9 Q. imbricaria.

    Leaves more or less deeply lobed, the lobes and teeth
        conspicuously bristle pointed.

      Mature leaves smooth beneath, except tufts of hairs
          in the axils.

        Leaves lobed to about the middle, the lateral lobes
            broadest at the base; cup saucer-shaped; nut
            about 1.5-2 cm. in diameter; terminal buds
            reddish.                                    10 Q. rubra.

        Leaves lobed to beyond the middle, frequently those
            grown in dense shade not so deeply lobed, some or
            all of the lateral lobes broadest toward the apex.

          Cup saucer-shaped, rarely enclosing the nut for
              more than 1/3 its length; trees of the low
              lands and swamps.

            Leaves glossy above; blades usually 10-12
                cm. long; cups usually 1.5 cm. or less
                broad; terminal buds chestnut brown.    11 Q. palustris.

            Leaves dull above, usually about 15 cm.
                long; cups 1.5-2.5 cm. broad, rarely
                as narrow as 1.5 cm.; terminal buds
                grayish brown.                          12 Q. Schneckii.

          Cup hemispheric, generally enclosing the nut
              for half its length; trees of the uplands.

            Inner bark yellowish or orange; kernel of nut
                yellowish or orange, and very bitter.

              Terminal buds usually 5 mm. or less in
                  length, ovoid and generally blunt,
                  reddish-brown; scales of cup closely
                  appressed; trees local in the extreme
                  northwest part of the State.          13 Q.
                                                           ellipsoidalis.

              Terminal buds usually longer than 6 mm.,
                  usually angled and sharp-pointed;
                  scales of cup not closely appressed;
                  trees of all parts of the State       14 Q. velutina.

            Inner bark reddish or gray; kernel white
                and not very bitter                     15 Q. coccinea.

      Mature leaves more or less pubescent on the whole
          under surface.

      Leaves grayish or yellowish pubescent beneath;
          scales of cup with a reddish-brown border;
          nut enclosed for about 1/3 its length         16 Q. falcata.

      Leaves brownish or rusty pubescent beneath, sometimes
          appearing grayish; scales of cup without a dark
          border; nut enclosed for about half of its length.

        Leaves expanded at the apex, and generally with
            three lobes; mature twigs generally
            scurvy-pubescent                            17 Q. marilandica.

        Leaves deeply lobed; mature twigs generally
            glabrous.                                   14 Q. velutina.

=1.= =Quercus álba= Linnæus. White Oak. Plate 40. Large trees with gray,
fissured bark, flaky on the branches, on the upper part of the trunks of
some trees the bark loosens at the fissures and peels back, forming flat
strips which remain attached at one side; twigs at first hairy, becoming
smooth; leaves mostly obovate in outline, generally 8-20 cm. long on
petioles 0.5-2 cm. long, more or less deeply lobed into 5-9 lobes, the
lobes ascending and generally blunt and entire, sometimes the lobes have
one or two secondary lobes, leaves narrowed and oblique at the base,
smooth above, smooth and glaucous beneath; acorns sessile or on stalks
up to 2 cm. long; nuts quite variable on different trees as to size and
shape, ovoid or oblong, 18-30 mm. long; cup flat on the bottom,
tuberculate and encloses about 1/4 of the nut; scales blunt and woolly.

=Distribution.=--Maine, southern Ontario, Minnesota south to Florida and
Texas. Found in all parts of Indiana. In point of number it is exceeded
only by the beech, although it has a more general distribution. It is
adapted to many types of soil, and is found in almost all situations in
Indiana except in very wet soils. It is sparingly found in the sand dune
area. On the clay soils of the northern part of the State it is a
frequent to an abundant tree, and in the southern part of the State it
often forms complete stands on the slopes of the hills.

The white oak is one of the largest and possibly the longest lived tree
of Indiana. While it is able to adapt itself to many situations, it
grows to the largest size in a porous, moist and rich soil.

=Remarks.=--Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, tough, strong and durable.
On account of its abundance, and wide range of uses, it has always been
the most important timber tree of Indiana.

Formerly the woods were full of white oak 1-1.5 meters (3-5 ft.) in
diameter, but today trees of a meter (3 ft.) in diameter with long
straight trunks are rare indeed. Michaux who traveled extensively in
America 1801-1807, while the whole Mississippi Valley was yet a
wilderness, remarks: "The white oak is the most valuable tree in
America." He observed the ruthless destruction of this valuable tree,
and predicted that the supply would soon be depleted, and that America
would be sorry that regulations were not adopted to conserve the supply
of this valuable tree. Michaux's prediction has come true, and yet no
constructive measures have been provided to insure the Nation an
adequate supply of this timber. It should be remembered that it requires
two to three hundred years to grow a white oak a meter in diameter, and
if we are to have white oak of that size in the next generation the
largest of our present stand must be spared for that harvest.

[Illustration: Plate 40.

QUERCUS ALBA Linnæus. White Oak. (× 1/2.)

Acorns from different trees to show variation.]

White oak was formerly much used in construction work, but it has become
so costly that cheaper woods take its place. At present it is used
principally in cooperage, interior finish, wagon and car stock,
furniture, agricultural implements, crossties, and veneer. Indiana has
the reputation of furnishing the best grade of white oak in the world.

Little attention has been given this valuable species either in
horticultural or forestal planting. This no doubt is due in a great
measure to the slow growth of the tree. It should be used more for shade
tree, ornamental and roadside tree planting. There are good reasons why
white oak should be much used in reforestation. The cheapest and most
successful method of propagating white oak is to plant the seed in the
places where the trees are desired to grow. This is best done by
planting the acorns as soon as they fall or are mature. The best results
will be obtained if the nuts are planted with the small end down, and
covered about an inch deep with earth. If the ground is a hard clay soil
and the small end of the nut is placed down a half inch of earth on the
nut is sufficient. Rodents often destroy the nuts, and if this danger is
apprehended it is best to poison the rodents or to stratify the seed, or
grow seedlings and plant them when they are one year old. In forestal
planting it is suggested that the planting be 4 × 4 feet.

The white oak is quite variable in the lobing of the leaves, and in size
and shape of the fruit, and in the length of its peduncle. The variable
lobing of the leaves has lead several authors to describe varieties
based on this character. The latest is that of Sargent[32] who
describes: "The trees with leaves less deeply divided, with broad
rounded lobes and usually smaller generally sessile fruit," as =Quercus
alba= variety =latiloba=.

=Quercus alba × Muhlenbérgii= (× _Quercus Deami_ Trelease). This rare
hybrid was discovered in a woods about 3 miles northwest of Bluffton
Indiana by L. A. Williamson and his son E. B. Williamson in 1904.[33]

The tree is still standing and in 1918 bore a heavy crop of seed. A
liberal quantity was sent for propagation to the Arnold Arboretum, New
York Botanical Gardens, and Missouri Botanical Gardens. The Arboretum
succeeded in germinating several seed. The New York Gardens succeeded in
getting 5 seedlings. The Missouri Gardens failed to get any to
germinate. About a gallon of seeds was planted in the Clark County State
forest nursery and all failed.

=2.= =Quercus bícolor Willdenow.= Swamp White Oak. Plate 41. Large
trees; leaves on petioles 5-20 mm. long, 8-18 cm. long, obovate,
wedge-shaped or narrowly rounded at base, rounded or pointed at the
apex, margins coarsely divided with rounded or blunt teeth or somewhat
pinnatifid, primary venation beneath somewhat regular, but usually some
of the veins end in a sinus of the margin, both surfaces hairy at first,
becoming smooth above and remaining velvety pubescent beneath; the upper
surface of the leaf a bronze or dark green and the under surface grayish
due to the dense tomentum, which in some instances becomes sparse and
short, in which case the under surface is a light green; acorns usually
in pairs on stalks 2-7 cm. long; nuts ovoid, 2-2.5 cm. long, enclosed
for 1/3-1/2 their length in the cup; scales of cup acute to very long
acuminate, scurvy pubescent and frequently tuberculate; kernel sweetish.

=Distribution.=--Maine, southern Ontario, southern Minnesota south to
Georgia and Arkansas. Found in all parts of Indiana. It is always found
in wet places. In most of its range it is associated with the bur oak
from which it is not commonly separated. In the northern counties it is
usually associated with pin and bur oak, and white elm; in the flats of
the southeastern part of the State it is usually associated with cow oak
and sweet gum, while in the southwestern counties it is found most
commonly with Spanish and pin oak.

=Remarks.=--Commercially the wood is not distinguished from white oak,
and the cut is sold for that species.

=3.= =Quercus Muhlenbérgii= Engelmann. Chinquapin Oak. Sweet Oak. Yellow
Oak. Chestnut Oak. Plate 42. Large trees; leaves on petioles 1-3 cm.
long, blades very variable in size, shape and leaf margins, generally
10-20 cm. long, oblong-lanceolate to broadly obovate, narrowed or
rounded and more or less unequal at the base, taper-pointed at the apex,
the apex always forming an acute angle, margins coarsely and rather
regularly toothed, primary veins beneath regular and straight, and end
in a prominent gland in the point of the teeth, teeth more or less
incurved, leaves smooth and dark green above, and grayish pubescent
beneath; acorns generally sessile, but often on short stalks up to 1 cm.
long; nut ovoid to oblong ovoid, 10-18 mm. long, enclosed for 1/4-1/2
its length in a very thin cup; scales of cup ovate, blunt-pointed or
merely acute, sometimes tuberculate near the base of the cup, grayish
pubescent without; kernel sweet, and the most edible of all of our
oaks.

[Illustration: Plate 41.

QUERCUS BICOLOR Willdenow. Swamp White Oak. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 42.

QUERCUS MUHLENBERGII Engelmann. Chinquapin Oak. (× 1/2.)

Detached acorns and leaves from different trees.]

=Distribution.=--Vermont, southwestern Ontario to Wisconsin and south to
Florida and west to Texas. Found in limited numbers in all parts of
Indiana, although Hill's record for Lake county is the only record in
the block of the 12 northwest counties. It is without a doubt found in
every county south of the Wabash River. It is a rare or an infrequent
tree in practically all parts of its range. It is generally found on the
dry banks of streams, river terrace banks, rocky bluffs of streams, and
only rarely in level dry woods. In the southern counties it is sometimes
found on clay or rocky ridges. In most of its range it is now so rare
that most of the inhabitants do not know the tree.

=Remarks.=--Wood similar to white oak, and with the same uses.

In White County a pioneer was found who knew the tree only by the name
of pigeon oak. He said it received this name from the fact that the wild
pigeons were fond of the acorns.

The leaves of this tree vary greatly in size, shape, and leaf margins.
The fruit also varies on different trees in the shape of the nut, and
the depth of the cup. These variations have lead some authors to
separate the forms and one histological study[34] seems to support minor
differences. It has been observed that the leaves in the top of some
trees may be thick, narrow and with long incurved teeth, while the
leaves of the lower branches will be strongly obovate, thinner, and the
teeth more dentate. In a general study it is best to include the
polymorphic forms under one name. The distribution of the shallow and
deep cup forms is so general that no regional or habitat areas can be
assigned to either of them in Indiana.

=4.= =Quercus Michaúxii= Nuttall (_Quercus Prinus_ Sargent). Cow Oak.
Basket Oak. Plate 43. Large trees; leaves on petioles 1-3 cm. long,
generally 1-2 dm. long, obovate, narrowed or narrowly rounded at the
base, short taper-pointed, the apex generally blunt, the margins
coarsely toothed, the teeth broad and rounded or more rarely acute,
shaded leaves sometimes with margins merely undulate, hairy on both
surfaces when young, becoming at maturity a dark yellow green and
glabrous above, sometimes remaining somewhat pubescent along the midrib
and the principal veins, leaves grayish and woolly pubescent beneath;
acorns solitary or in pairs, sessile or on very short stalks, up to
almost a cm. in length; nuts ovoid or oval with a broad base, enclosed
for about 1/3 their length by the cup, the cups thick and generally 2-3
cm. broad; scales ovate, acute, rather blunt-pointed and more or less
tuberculate near the base of the cup, tomentose on the back; kernel
sweet.

[Illustration: Plate 43.

QUERCUS MICHAUXII Nuttall. Cow or Basket Oak. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Delaware, southern Indiana, Missouri, south to Florida
and west to Texas. In Indiana it is believed that its distribution is
pretty well known and well defined. It is an inhabitant of low wet
woods, although large trees may be found in fairly dry woods which have
been made dry by drainage. In discussing the distribution it must be
remembered that this species was reported as _Quercus Prinus_ before the
sixth edition of Gray's Manual which was published in 1890. Gorby's[35]
reference to Miami County should be ignored, because he compiled his
list of trees from a list of common names to which he appended the
scientific names. His list includes several species which are not
native, and his water willow (_Dianthera americana_) is an herbaceous
plant. Wilson's[36] report for Hamilton County I believe also to be an
error. Wilson preserved no specimen. Since Hamilton County has no cow
oak habitat, and Wilson was not acquainted with the species, I think
this reference should be transferred to the broad-leaf form of _Quercus
Muhlenbergii_. The author has collected and distributed authentic
specimens from a point 2-1/2 miles southwest of Napoleon in Ripley
County. This species is reported by Meyncke for Franklin County as
scarce, and by Collins for Dearborn County. Since the habitat of the
species is found in these counties, it is fair to admit them into the
range of the species. This species is a frequent to a very common tree
in the flats of Clark, Scott, Jefferson, Jackson, Jennings, and Ripley
Counties, where it is usually associated with beech and sweet gum. It is
now known to range as far north as the northern parts of Jackson,
Jennings and Ripley Counties. It is an infrequent tree of the Lower
Wabash Valley as far north as southern Knox County and no doubt followed
eastward along White River. It follows the Ohio River eastward at least
to a point six miles east of Grandview in Spencer County. It no doubt
was an occasional tree along the Ohio River up to Dearborn County. It
has also been reported by Aiken for Hamilton County, Ohio. In the Lower
Wabash Valley it is associated with Spanish and pin oak.

=Remarks.=--Wood and uses similar to white oak. In the flats of
southeastern Indiana it is generally called white oak, and in some
places it is known as bur oak. It grows very rapidly and to a large
size. A tree was measured in 1919 in the Klein woods about 4 miles north
of North Vernon that was 3.57 meters (11 feet, 7 inches) in
circumference, breast high, and was estimated to be 15 m. (50 feet) to
the first branch.

This species when grown in the open forms a large oval head, and in
moist soil would make one of the best shade and roadside trees to be
had. It is not known how it would adapt itself to high ground, but it
is believed this species is worthy a trial as a shade tree. It is
apparently hardy in the northern counties.

=Quercus Bèadlei= Trelease. (_Quercus alba × Michauxii_). This hybrid
between the white and cow oak was found by the writer in 1913 in the
White River bottoms 3 miles east of Medora in Jackson County.

The tree measured 3.54 meters (139 inches) in circumference breast high.
Specimens were distributed under No. 19,037, and the determination was
made by William Trelease, our leading authority on oaks.

=5.= =Quercus Prìnus= Linnæus. (_Quercus montana_ Willdenow of some
recent authors). Chestnut Oak. Plate 44. Medium to large sized tree;
bark dark, tight, deeply fissured, the furrows wide, and the ridges
continuous; leaves on petioles 1-3 cm. long, 1-2 dm. long, obovate to
lanceolate, those growing in the shade usually the widest, rounded at
the base, usually narrowly so or even wedge-shaped, short or long
taper-pointed at the apex, the apex blunt, margins coarsely and nearly
regularly crenate-toothed, the teeth broad and rounded, dark green above
at maturity, a lighter and usually a yellow or grayish green beneath,
only slightly hairy above when young, soon becoming entirely glabrate,
very pubescent beneath when young and usually remaining so until
maturity; petioles, midrib and primary veins beneath are usually
conspicuously yellow, which is a distinctive character of this species;
acorns solitary or in pairs, on short stalks usually about 1 cm. long,
sometimes sessile; nuts large ovoid or oblong-ovoid, 2-3 cm. long,
enclosed generally for about 1/3 their length in a thin cup; scales with
triangular blunt tips, generally somewhat tuberculate and pubescent on
the back; kernel sweet.

=Distribution.=--Maine, northern shore of Lake Erie, to west central
Indiana and south to northern Georgia and Alabama. In Indiana its
distribution is limited to the knobstone and sandstone area of the
State. Its distribution has been fairly well mapped. Two large trees on
the edge of the top of the bluff of the Ohio River at Marble Hill which
is located in the south corner of Jefferson County is the eastern limit
of its range. It crowns some of the ridges, sometimes extending down the
adjacent slopes a short distance, from Floyd County north to the south
side of Salt Creek in Brown County. Its range then extends west to the
east side of Monroe County, thence southwestward to the west side of
Martin County, thence south to the Ohio River. Where it is found it is
generally such a common tree that the areas are commonly called chestnut
oak ridges and are regarded as our poorest and most stony land. In Floyd
and Clark counties it is usually associated with scrub pine. In the
remainder of its range it is generally associated with black jack post
and black oaks. In our area this species is never found closely
associated with limestone, and reports of this species being found on
limestone areas should be referred to _Quercus Muhlenbergii_.

[Illustration: Plate 44.

QUERCUS PRINUS Linnæus. Chestnut Oak. (× 1/2.)

Acorns and loose leaves from different trees.]

=Remarks.=--Wood similar and uses generally the same as white oak. The
tree usually grows in such poor situations that it never acquires a
large diameter, and it is only when a tree is found in a cove or in
richer and deeper soil that it grows to a large size. The amount of this
species is very limited and it is therefore of no especial economic
importance as a source of timber supply. The bark is rich in tannin. The
crests of chestnut oak ridges are often cut bare of this species. The
trunks are made into crossties, and the larger branches are peeled for
their bark. The nuts germinate on top of the ground as soon as they
fall, or even before they fall. Usually a large percentage germinate.
The tree grows rapidly where soil conditions are at all favorable. It is
believed that this species should be used to reforest the chestnut oak
ridges of the State, and possibly it would be one of the best to employ
on the slopes of other poor ridges.

=6.= =Quercus stellàta= Wangenheim. Post Oak. Plate 45. Medium to large
trees; bark resembles that of the white oak except on old trees the
fissures are deeper when compared with a white oak of equal size, and
the ridges are usually broken into shorter lengths; twigs stout,
yellowish-brown at first, remaining this color more or less to the end
of the season, at first densely covered with hairs which remain
throughout the season, and usually one year old branchlets are more or
less tomentose; leaves on hairy petioles 0.3-3 cm. long, generally about
1 cm. long; leaves obovate in outline, commonly 1-2 dm. long and about
2/3 as wide, and generally lobed into five principal lobes which are
disposed as follows: the two basal are formed by two deep sinuses just
below the middle of the leaf which cut off a large roughly triangular
portion, one angle of which forms the base, the top two angles prolonged
on each side into a rounded lobe which may be long or short; the
terminal lobe is produced by two deep sinuses which constrict the blade
at about 1/4-1/3 its length from the apex; the two basal and two
terminal sinuses form the two lateral lobes which in size are equal to
about one half of the leaf area; the lateral lobes are generally
ascending with the terminal portion usually indented with a shallow
sinus which produces two short lobes; the terminal lobe of the leaf
commonly has two or three shallow secondary lobes; all the lobes of the
leaf are rounded; base of leaf narrowed or rounded; leaves very thick at
maturity, when they first appear both surfaces are densely covered with
a yellowish pubescence, at maturity the upper surface is a dark glossy
green, and smooth or nearly so, except some leaves retain fascicles of
hairs, and the midrib and principal veins may be more or less rough
pubescent, the under surface at maturity is a gray-green, and remains
more or less densely covered with fascicles of hairs; acorns single or
in clusters, sessile or nearly so; nuts small, ovoid 10-15 mm. long and
6-10 mm. wide, inclosed for about 1/2 their length in the cup; scales
ovate, gray or reddish brown, tomentose on the back, blunt except those
near the top of the cup which are sometimes acute; kernel sweet.

[Illustration: Plate 45.

QUERCUS STELLATA Wangenheim. Post Oak. (× 1/2.)

Acorns from different trees.]

=Distribution.=--Massachusetts, Indiana, south to Florida, and west to
Oklahoma and Texas. In Indiana it is confined to the southwestern part
of the State. In our area it is found on the crest of ridges in the knob
area where it is generally associated with black, and black jack oaks,
hence in our poorest and thinnest soils. West of the knob area it takes
up different habitats. From Vigo County southward it is found on sand
ridges associated with black and black jack oaks. West of the knob area
it is frequently found in black oak woods and in Warrick County about
two miles southwest of Tennyson it is a frequent tree in the Little
Pigeon Creek bottoms which are a hard light clay soil. Here it is
associated with pin oak and cork elm (_Ulmus alata_). In the Lower
Wabash Valley, especially in Point Township of Posey County in the hard
clay of this area it is a frequent to a common tree, associated with
Spanish, pin, swamp, white and shingle oaks, and sweet gum. In this area
it grows to be a large tree.

This species has been reported for Hamilton County by Wilson, but I
regard this reference a wrong identification which will relieve Hamilton
County of the reputation of having "post oak" land. It was reported,
also, by Gorby for Miami County. Since Gorby's list is wholly
unreliable, it is best to drop this reference. Higley and Raddin[37]
reported a single tree near Whiting. Nieuwland[38] reported this species
from near Mineral Springs in Porter County, the report being based on
his number 10,207 which I have not seen. There is no reason to doubt
these references, because it is not an unusual thing to find a southern
form jump from southern Indiana to a congenial habitat about Lake
Michigan.

=Remarks.=--Wood is similar but tougher than white oak, and its uses are
the same as white oak. Since in our area the tree is usually medium
sized, most of the trees are worked up into crossties. A tree in a black
oak woods 4 miles east of Washington in Daviess County measured 2.22
meters (87-1/2 inches) in circumference breast high. This species in
some localities is called iron oak, and in Gibson County on the sand
dune area it is called sand bur oak.

[Illustration: Plate 46.

QUERCUS MACROCARPA Michaux. Bur Oak. (× 1/2.)

Acorns from different trees.

The right two belong to the variety OLIVÆFORMIS.]

=7.= =Quercus macrocàrpa= Michaux. Bur Oak. Plate 46. Large trees;
branchlets of young trees generally develop corky wings which are
usually absent on mature trees; leaves on petioles 1-2 cm. long, obovate
in outline, generally 1-2.5 dm. long, the margins more or less deeply
cut so that there are usually 7 lobes, sometimes only 5, or as many as 9
or 11, sometimes the sinuses extend to the midrib, giving the leaf a
"skeleton" appearance, the lobes are very irregular in shape and
variously arranged, but often appear as if in pairs, lobes rounded and
ascending, the larger lobes are sometimes somewhat lobed, the three
terminal lobes are usually the largest and considered as a whole would
equal in size one half or more of the entire leaf area, the base of the
leaf is wedge-shape or narrowly rounded; leaves at maturity are dark
green and smooth above, or somewhat pubescent along the midrib, a
gray-green and woolly pubescent beneath; acorns usually solitary,
sometimes in pairs or clusters of three, sessile or on short stalks,
sometimes on stalks as long as 2.5 cm.; nuts very variable in size and
shape, ovoid to oblong, often very much depressed at the apex, 2-3 cm.
long, enclosed from 1/3 to almost their entire length in the cup which
is fringed at the top; cups thick and large, sometimes 4.5 cm. in
diameter; scales tomentose on the back and somewhat tuberculate, blunt
near the base of the cup, but at and near the top of the cup they become
long attenuate and on some trees appear almost bristle like; kernel
sweet.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia to Manitoba, south to Georgia and west to
Texas and Wyoming. Found in all parts of Indiana, although we have no
reports from the knob area where no doubt it is only local. It is a tree
of wet woods, low borders of streams, etc., except among the hills of
southern Indiana, it is an occasional tree of the slopes. In favorable
habitats it was a frequent to a common tree. Its most constant
associates are white elm, swamp white and red oak, linn, green and black
ash, shellbark hickory, etc. It is sometimes called mossy-cup oak.

=Remarks.=--Wood and uses similar to that of white oak. In point of
number, size and value it ranks as one of the most valuable trees of the
State. Michaux[39] says: "A tree three miles from Troy, Ohio, was
measured that was fourteen feet and nine inches in diameter six feet
above the ground. The trunk rises about fifty feet without limbs, and
with scarcely a perceptible diminution in size."

=7a.= =Quercus macrocarpa= var. =olivæfórmis= (Michaux filius) Gray.
This variety is distinguished from the typical form by its shallow cup,
and the long oval nut which is often 3 cm. long. The cup is
semi-hemispheric, and encloses the nut for about one-half its length.

Authentic specimens are at hand from Wells County, and it has been
reported from Gibson and Hamilton Counties. No doubt this form has a
wider range.

=8.= =Quercus lyràta= Walter. Overcup Oak. Plate 47. Medium sized trees;
bark generally intermediate between that of the swamp white and bur oak;
leaves on petioles 5-30 mm. long which are generally somewhat reddish
toward the base, 10-20 cm. long, obovate or oblong-obovate, margins very
irregularly divided into 5-9 short or long lobes, ascending and
generally acute, ordinarily the three terminal lobes are the largest,
base of leaves wedge-shape, or narrowly rounded, upper surface at
maturity dark green and smooth, the under surface densely covered with a
thick tomentum to which is added more or less long and single or
fascicled straight hairs; when the leaves are as described on the under
surface they are gray beneath; however, a form occurs which is yellow
green beneath and has little or no tomentum, but is thickly covered with
long single or fascicled straight hairs; acorn single or in pairs, on
stalks generally about 1 cm. long, sometimes the stalks are 3 cm. long,
the stalk lies in a plane at a right angle to the base of the acorn
which is a characteristic of this species; nut depressed-globose, about
1.5 cm. long, generally almost completely enclosed in the cup, or
sometimes enclosed only for about 2/3 its length; cup generally very
thick at the base, gradually becoming thinner at the top, and often it
splits open; scales tomentose on the back, those near the base, thick
and tuberculate on the back and blunt, but those near the top of the cup
are acute or long attenuate; kernel sweet.

=Distribution.=--Maryland to Missouri,[40] and south to Florida and west
to Texas. In Indiana it is found only about river sloughs or deep swamps
in the southwestern counties. At present it is known only from Knox,
Gibson, Posey and Spencer Counties. It was reported by Nieuwland[41] for
Marshall County on the authority of Clark. This specimen was taken
during a survey of Lake Maxinkuckee, and is deposited in the National
Museum. I have had the specimen examined by an authority, who reports
that it is some other species. Its habitat is that of areas that are
inundated much of the winter season. It is so rare that its associates
could not be learned. In one place it grew in a depression lower than a
nearby pin oak, and in another place it grew in a depression in a very
low woods, surrounded by sweet gum, big shell bark hickory, and pin oak.
It is generally found singly in depressions, but it is a common tree on
the low border of the west side of Burnett's pond in Gibson County.

=Remarks.=--Wood and uses similar to that of white oak. In our area it
is usually known as bur oak.

[Illustration: Plate 47.

QUERCUS LYRATA Walter. Overcup Oak. (× 1/2.)

Acorns from different trees.]

=9.= =Quercus imbricària= Michaux. Shingle Oak. Plate 48. Medium to
large sized trees; leaves on petioles generally 0.5-1 cm. long, 7-16 cm.
long, elliptic to oblong-lanceolate, narrowed or rounded at the base,
apex generally sharp-pointed and ending with a bristle, sometimes very
wide leaves are blunt at the apex, margins entire, when they first
appear the upper surface is somewhat woolly and the under surface
whitish with a dense tomentum, soon glabrous and a dark green above,
remaining more or less densely woolly or pubescent beneath; acorns
sessile or nearly so, solitary or in pairs; nuts ovoid, about 1 cm. long
and enclosed for about 1/2 their length in the cup; cup rounded at the
base; scales pubescent on the back and obtuse.

=Distribution.=--Pennsylvania, Michigan to Nebraska, south to Georgia
and west to Arkansas. Found throughout Indiana. It is essentially a tree
of low ground, but it is sometimes found near the base of slopes, and in
the knob area it is sometimes found on the crest of ridges. In all parts
of Indiana except the southwestern part it is found only locally and
then usually in colonies of a few trees. In Wells County, I know of only
two trees located at the base of a slope bordering a pond in Jackson
Township. In the southwestern part of the State it is frequent to a
common tree in its peculiar habitat. It appears that when drainage
basins decrease in size, and leave sandy river bottoms, and bordering
low sand dunes, that the shingle oak is the first oak to occupy the
area. On the sand ridges it is crowded out by the black, black jack and
post oaks. In the bottoms it is succeeded by pin, Schneck's, Spanish,
swamp white and post oaks. Special notes were made on its distribution
on a trip through Gibson, Pike, Daviess, Greene and Sullivan Counties,
going from Francisco northward through the Patoka bottoms where in many
places it forms pure stands. Usually in situations a little higher than
the pin oak zone. Thence eastward to Winslow and then north to Sandy
Hook in Daviess County, thence north to Washington, Montgomery, Odon,
Newberry, Lyons, Marco and Sullivan. In its habitat all along this route
it was a frequent to a very common tree. A few miles northeast of
Montgomery is a small area which a pioneer informed me was originally a
prairie. Typical prairie plants are yet found along the roadside and
fences in the area. I was informed that the shingle oak was the only
species found on the area, and on the border of the area. It is believed
the mass distribution of the species was in the area indicated by the
preceding route. Both east and west of this area the species becomes
less frequent.

=Remarks.=--Wood similar to red oak, but much inferior. Evidently it is
rather a slow growing tree, but it might find a use as a shade or
ornamental tree in sandy habitats where the pin oak would not thrive. It
is also called black oak, peach oak, jack oak and water oak.

[Illustration: Plate 48.

QUERCUS IMBRICARIA Michaux. Shingle Oak. (× 1/2.)]

=10.= =Quercus rùbra= Linnæus. [_Quercus maxima_ (Marshall) Ashe of some
recent authors]. Red Oak. Plate 49. Large trees; winter buds ovoid,
pointed, reddish, outer scales glabrous, sometimes pubescent on the
edges; twigs soon smooth and reddish; leaves on petioles 2.5-5 cm. long,
10-20 cm. long, oval to oblong-obovate, broadly wedge-shape or truncate
at the base, the margins divided by wide or narrow sinuses generally
into 7-9 lobes, sometimes as many as 11, the lobes not uniform in size
or shape, lobes broadest at the base and ending generally in 1-5 bristle
points, pubescent above and below at first, soon becoming smooth at
maturity and a dark green above, paler and yellowish-green beneath and
smooth or with tufts of tomentum in the axils of the veins; acorns
solitary or in pairs, sessile or on very short stalks; nuts ovoid, flat
at the base, and rounded at the apex, 2-3 cm. long, enclosed for about
1/4 their length in the shallow cup; cups 2-3 cm. in diameter, thick,
saucer-shape, flat or only slightly rounded at the base; scales ovate,
blunt, appressed, and pubescent on the back; kernel somewhat bitter,
eaten by hogs and cattle, but not relished by wild animals.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia to Minnesota, south to Florida and west to
Texas. Found throughout Indiana, although local in the knob area. Its
preferred habitat is that of moist, rich and fairly well drained woods.
It does not thrive in situations that are inundated much of the winter
season such as the pin oak will endure. In the southern part of the
State, especially in the flats it is frequently found on the high bluffs
of streams and very large forest trees are frequent on a dry wooded
slope of ten acres, on the Davis farm four miles south of Salem. In a
congenial habitat it was a frequent to a common tree, although such a
thing as nearly a pure stand would never be met with, such as was often
formed by the white, black, shingle or pin oak.

=Remarks.=--Wood hard, heavy, strong, close-grained, but not as good as
white oak in any of its mechanical qualities. Commercially all of the
biennial oaks are usually considered as red oak. The true red oak,
however, is generally considered the best of all the biennial oaks.
Until recently, when white oak became scarce, red oak was not in much
demand, and was used principally for construction material. Now it is
substituted in many places for white oak, and the uses now are in a
great measure the same as those of white oak.

The red oak grows rapidly, and is able to adapt itself to many soil
conditions. It has been used in European countries for two centuries for
shade and ornamental planting. It reproduces easily by planting the
acorns, and should receive attention by woodlot owners as a suitable
species for reinforcing woodlands, or in general forest planting.

[Illustration: Plate 49.

QUERCUS RUBRA Linnæus. Red Oak. (× 1/2.)

Acorns from different trees.]

=11.= =Quercus palústris= Du Roi. Pin Oak. Plate 50. Medium to large
trees with very tight bark, the furrows shallow and generally wide;
twigs at first pubescent, soon becoming smooth and reddish-brown; leaves
on petioles generally 1-5 cm. long, blades about 7-15 cm. long, usually
about 2/3 as wide, sometimes as wide as long, ovate to obovate in
outline, narrowed to broadly truncate at the base, the margins divided
into 5-7 lobes by deep and wide sinuses, except leaves that grow in the
shade, the sinus cuts the blade to more than half way to the midrib, the
lobes are widest at the base, or sometimes widest near the apex, the
lobes usually somewhat toothed or lobed and end in 1-7 bristle tips,
leaves hairy when they first appear, soon becoming glabrate and a glossy
dark green above, a paler green beneath and smooth except tufts of hairs
in the axils of the principal veins; acorns sessile or nearly so, single
or in clusters; nuts subglobose or ovoid, generally 10-12 mm. long, the
ovoid form somewhat smaller, covered about 1/4 their length by the
shallow cups; cups saucer-shape and generally flat on the bottom, those
with the ovoid nuts are rounded on the bottom; scales pubescent on the
back, and rounded or blunt at the apex.

=Distribution.=--Massachusetts, southwestern Ontario, Michigan to Iowa
and south to Virginia and west to Oklahoma. Found in every county of
Indiana. It is found only in wet situations where it is a frequent to a
common tree. It prefers a hard compact clay soil with little drainage
hence is rarely met with on the low borders of lakes where the soil is
principally organic matter.

=Remarks.=--Wood similar to red oak, but much inferior to it. It is
tardy in the natural pruning of its lower branches, and when the dead
branches break off they usually do so at some distance from the trunk.
The stumps of the dead branches which penetrate to the center of the
tree have given it the name of pin oak. It is also sometimes called
water oak, and swamp oak.

For street and ornamental planting it is one of the most desirable oaks
to use. It is adapted to a moist soil, grows rapidly, and produces a
dense shade. When grown in the open it develops a pyramidal crown.

The nut of this species always has a depressed form, except a tree or
two in Wells County which produce ovate nuts which are cone-pointed, and
in bulk about half the size of the ordinary form. This form should be
looked for to ascertain its area of distribution.

[Illustration: Plate 50.

QUERCUS PALUSTRIS Muenchhausen. (× 1/2.)

Acorns from different trees. Those on the left the common form, those on
the right the rare form.]

[Illustration: Plate 51.

QUERCUS SCHNECKII Britton. Schneck's Oak. (× 1/2.)

Specimens from type tree.]

=12.= =Quercus Schnéckii= Britton. Schneck's Oak. Plate 51. Large trees;
bark somewhat intermediate between pin and red oak; twigs gray by
autumn; winter buds large, about 0.5 cm. long, ovoid, glabrous and gray;
leaves on petioles 2-6 cm. long, blades generally 8-18 cm. long,
generally truncate at the base, sometimes wedge-shaped, leaves ovate to
obovate in outline, divided into 5-7 lobes, by deep rounded and wide
sinuses, the sinuses cutting the blade to more than half way to the
midrib, except the leaves of lower branches that grow in the shade, the
lobes variable in shape and size, usually the lowest are the shortest
and smaller, the middle the longest and largest, the lobes are sometimes
widest at the base, and sometimes widest at the apex, the end of the
lobes are more or less toothed or lobed; the leaves at maturity are
bright green, glossy and smooth above, a paler and yellow green and
smooth beneath except tufts of hairs in the axils of the principal
veins; acorns solitary or in pairs, usually on stalks about 0.5 cm.
long; nuts ovoid, sometimes broadly so, or oblong, broad and flat or
slightly convex at base, usually 1.5-2 cm. long, enclosed in the cup
from 1/4-1/3 their length; cups flat or convex at the base: scales
generally pubescent on the back, gray or with a reddish tip on those of
the Lower Wabash Valley, or reddish gray and with margins more or less
red of trees of the Upper Wabash Valley.

=Distribution.=--In Indiana this species has been reported only from
Wells, Bartholomew, Vermillion, Knox, Gibson and Posey Counties. This
species was not separated from our common red oak until after all of the
local floras of Indiana had been written, and it may have a much wider
range than is at present known. In Wells County it is the prevailing
"red oak" of the county, and no doubt is distributed throughout the
Wabash Valley. In this area it is associated with all moist ground
species. In the lower Wabash Valley, especially in Gibson, Knox and
Posey Counties it is associated with Spanish, pin, and shingle oaks,
sweet gum, etc. Several trees were noted in Knox County in Little
Cypress swamp where it was associated with cypress, pin oak, white elm,
red maple and swell-butt ash.

=Remarks.=--This anomalous red oak has a range from Indiana to Texas.
When the attention of authors was directed to it, several new species
were the result. Later authors are not agreed as to whether this form,
which has such a wide range and hence liable to show considerable
variation within such a long range, is one or several species. C. S.
Sargent who for years has studied this form throughout its range has
seen the author's specimens and calls those with shallow cups typical or
nearly typical _Quercus Shumardii_ Buckley[42] and those with the deep
cups _Quercus Shumardii_ variety _Schneckii_ (Britton) Sargent.

The writer has made rather an intensive study of the forms in Wells
County and in the Lower Wabash Valley and has not been able to satisfy
himself that, allowing for a reasonable variation, there is even a
varietal difference in Indiana forms. The description has been drawn to
cover all of the forms of Indiana.

Dr. J. Schneck of Mt. Carmel, Illinois, was one of the first to discover
that this form was not our common red oak, and when he called Dr.
Britton's attention to it, Dr. Britton named it _Quercus Schneckii_ in
honor of its discoverer.

=13.= =Quercus ellipsoidàlis.= E. J. Hill. Hill's Oak. Plate 52. Medium
sized trees; inner bark yellowish; twigs pubescent at first, becoming
smooth and reddish brown by autumn; leaves on petioles 2-5 cm. long,
ovate to slightly obovate or nearly orbicular in outline, 7-15 cm. long,
wedge-shape or, truncate at the base, margin divided into 5-7 long lobes
by wide sinuses which usually extend to more than half way to the
midrib, sinuses rounded at the base, lobes broadest at the base or the
apex, ending in 1-7 bristle points, leaves at first pubescent, both
above and below, soon becoming glabrous above, and smooth beneath except
tufts of hairs in the axils of the principal veins; acorns nearly
sessile or on short stalks, single or in pairs; nuts oval to oblong,
12-20 mm. long, enclosed for 1/3-1/2 their length in the cup; scales
obtuse, light reddish-brown, pubescent on the back; kernel pale yellow
and bitter.

=Distribution.=--Northwestern Indiana to Manitoba and south to Iowa. In
Indiana it has been reported only from Lake and Porter Counties by Hill,
and from White County by Heimlich. According to Hill, who has made the
most extensive study of the distribution of this species in our area,
the tree is found on sandy and clayey uplands, and in moist sandy
places. It closely resembles the pin oak for which it has been mistaken.
It also resembles the black and scarlet oaks. We have very little data
on the range or distribution of the species in this State.

=14.= =Quercus velùtina= Lamarck. Black Oak. Plate 53. Medium to large
sized trees; inner bark yellow or orange; leaves on petioles 2-8 cm.
long, ovate oblong or obovate, very variable in outline and in size,
those of young trees and coppice shoots being very large, those of
mature trees usually 12-18 cm. long, wedge-shape or truncate at the
base, the margin divided into 5-9 lobes by wide and usually deep sinuses
which are rounded at the base, the lobes variable in shape and size, the
terminals of many of the lobes toothed or slightly lobed and ending in
one or more bristles, leaves pubescent on both sides at first, soon
becoming smooth, glossy and a dark green above; leaves of fruiting
branches usually smooth beneath except the tufts of brown hairs in the
axils of the principal veins, or rarely more or less pubescent over the
whole under surface, the under surface of leaves of sterile branches and
young trees usually are the most pubescent beneath, the leaves of some
trees are much like those of the scarlet oak, but on the whole are
larger; acorns sessile or nearly so, single or in pairs; nuts ovoid,
oblong or subglobose, 1.5-2 cm. long, enclosed for about half their
length in the cup-shaped cup; scales light-brown, densely pubescent on
the back, obtuse, loose above the middle of the cup; kernel bitter.

[Illustration: Plate 52.

QUERCUS ELLIPSOIDALIS E. J. Hill. Hill's Oak. (× 1/2.)

Specimens from type tree.]

[Illustration: Plate 53.

QUERCUS VELUTINA Lamarck. Black Oak. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Maine, southern Ontario, southern Minnesota, southern
Nebraska south to Florida and west to Texas. Found throughout Indiana.
It was no doubt found in every county or nearly every county of the
State. It of course would be a rare tree throughout the rich black loam
soils of the central Indiana counties. The black oak is confined to the
poorer soils of the State, such as clay and gravelly ridges, sand dunes,
sand ridges, and the hills of southern Indiana that are not covered with
beech or white oak. It is a frequent to a common tree in the
southwestern part of the State in the bottom lands where it is
associated with Schneck's, shingle, and post oaks. In the northern part
of the State it is generally associated with the white oak and if the
soil is very poor it will form almost pure stands. On the poor ridges of
southern Indiana it is generally associated with the white, and scarlet
oaks, and invades habitats still poorer which are occupied by post,
black jack, or chestnut oaks. Wherever the black oak is found it is
generally more than a frequent tree and is usually a common tree or
forms the principal stand. While the black is not so uniformly
distributed over the State as the white oak, yet in point of numbers it
nearly equals it, or may even exceed it.

In Floyd and Harrison Counties are certain small areas which were known
to the early settlers as the "barrens." These areas were treeless. They
were covered with a growth of some sort of oak which the natives call
"scrub" oak, hazel, and wild plum. The height of the growth in any part
would "not hide a man on horse back." These areas are now all under
cultivation, and are no longer distinguished from the forested areas.
However, many parts of the barrens are now covered with forests, but
these forests are a complete stand of black oak. Last year one of these
areas was cut off, and the age of the trees were ascertained to be about
65 years old. The barrens of southern Indiana and adjacent States offer
a good problem for ecologists.

=Remarks.=--Wood similar to that of red oak, but often much inferior.
The uses of the best grades of black oak are practically the same as red
oak.

Where the black and scarlet oaks are associated, the scarlet oak is
rarely separated from it. The two species superficially much resemble
each other. The black oak is always easily distinguished by cutting into
the inner bark which is yellow, while that of scarlet oak is gray or
reddish. The inner bark imparts a yellow color to spittle, and the
scarlet does not. When mature fruiting branches are at hand they may be
separated by the appearance of the acorns. The scales of the cups of
the black oak are dull, and loosely imbricated near the top while those
of the scarlet oak are rather glossy and closely imbricated. The scales
of the scarlet oak, however, become somewhat loose after the acorn has
matured, and fallen for some time.

This species is sometimes called yellow oak. Since the chinquapin oak is
also often called yellow oak, it is best to always call this species
black oak.

=15.= =Quercus coccínea= Muenchhausen. Scarlet Oak. Plate 54. Medium
sized trees with bark resembling the black oak, inner bark gray or
reddish; twigs reddish by autumn; winter buds reddish-brown and
pubescent; leaves on petioles 2.5-6 cm. long, broadly oval to obovate,
blades 7-15 cm. long, truncate or wedge-shape at the base, the blade
divided into 5-7 lobes by deep and wide sinuses which cut the blade more
than half the distance to the midrib, sinuses rounded at the base, the
lobes variable in size and shape, usually the lowest are the shortest
and smallest, the middle lobes the largest and longest, the lobes widest
either at the base or the apex, the terminal part toothed or lobed, the
terminal lobe generally 3-lobed or 3-toothed, both surfaces of the
leaves at first pubescent, soon smooth and a dark glossy green above,
and paler and smooth beneath except tufts of hairs in the axils of the
principal veins; acorns sessile or nearly so, solitary or in pairs; nuts
ovoid to oblong, 1.5-2 cm. long, enclosed for about half their length in
the thick cup-shape cup; scales triangular but blunt, closely appressed,
pubescent on the back except the center which is generally elevated and
smooth and shiny, giving the cup a glossy appearance which easily
separates it from its nearest ally the black oak whose cup is a dull,
ash or reddish gray color; kernel white within, and less bitter than the
black oak.

=Distribution.=--Maine, southern Ontario to southern Nebraska, south to
North Carolina, Alabama and Arkansas. It has been reported for the
northwest counties and the southern part of Indiana, but we have no
records for the east-central portion of the State. Clark reports it as
common about Winona Lake, but does not report _Quercus velutina_ which
is a common tree of the vicinity, and it is believed that Clark has
confused the two species. In the northern part of the State its habitat
is that of sand and gravel ridges associated with black oak. In the hill
part of southern Indiana it is intimately associated with the black oak
on the poorer ridges. We have no authentic records for the southwestern
counties. The author has Schneck's specimens on which the record for
Gibson and Posey County was based. I determined the specimens as
belonging to the Spanish oak, and William Trelease verified the
determination. I have no doubt that scarlet oak occurred on the sand
ridges of that area.

[Illustration: Plate 54.

QUERCUS COCCINEA Muenchhausen. Scarlet Oak. (× 1/2.)]

In the northern part of the State it is a rare or infrequent tree, while
in favorable habitats in the hill country of the southern part of the
State it is a frequent to a common tree.

=Remarks.=--Wood similar but much inferior to red oak. The cut in this
State is marketed as black oak, from which it is rarely separated.

=16.= =Quercus falcàta= Michaux. Spanish Oak. Plate 55. Large trees;
bark thick, rather deeply fissured, furrows usually narrow, ridges
generally broad and broken into short lengths, the outer bark is
reddish, except sometimes it becomes grayish by weathering; twigs
densely pubescent at first, remaining more or less pubescent during the
first year, or becoming smooth or nearly so and a reddish brown by
autumn; leaves on petioles 0.5-6 cm. long, ordinarily about 2-3 cm.
long, blades very variable in outline, ovate, ovate-oblong or obovate,
usually somewhat curved, wedge-shaped, rounded or truncate at the base,
shallow or deeply lobed, generally about 2/3 of the distance to the
midrib; lobes 3-11, commonly 5-9, the number, size and shape of the
lobes exceedingly variable, the longest lateral lobes are generally near
the middle of the leaf, sometimes the lowest pair, sometimes the upper
pair are the longest, terminal lobe triangular or oblong, generally
widest at the base, although frequently widest at the apex, lateral
lobes widest at the base and gradually becoming narrower, towards the
apex, rarely somewhat wider at the apex, generally somewhat curved,
lobes generally sharp-pointed, sometimes wide-angled or rounded at the
apex, margins of lobes entire, wavy, toothed or lobed, sinuses wide and
rounded at the base; leaves densely pubescent on both surfaces at first,
gradually becoming smooth and dark green above by autumn, the under
surface remaining covered with a tomentum which is grayish or yellowish;
acorns sessile or nearly so, solitary or in pairs; nuts broadly ovoid,
generally 10-12 mm. long, broadly rounded at the base, rounded at the
apex, enclosed about one-half their length by the cup; cups strongly
convex at the base; scales blunt, grayish and pubescent on their backs,
their margins reddish and generally smooth.

=Distribution.=--New Jersey and Missouri, south to Florida and west to
Texas. The known distribution in Indiana would be that part of the State
south of a line drawn from Vincennes to North Madison. It is local
except in the southwestern counties. In our area it is found on both
high and low ground. In Jefferson and Clark Counties it is found only in
the flats where it is associated with beech, sweet gum, pin oak, red
maple and black gum. A colony was found in Washington County on high
ground, about eight miles southwest of Salem associated with black and
post oak. In Harrison County about two miles southeast of Corydon it was
found on the crest of a ridge with white and black oak. In Daviess
County about four miles east of Washington it is associated with black
and post oak. In Knox, Gibson, Pike and Warrick Counties it is local on
sand ridges with black oak. It occurs in the greatest abundance in the
river bottoms of Gibson, Posey and Spencer Counties, where it is
generally associated with pin, Schneck's, shingle, swamp white, black
and post oaks, and sweet gum. In the last named counties it is fairly
well distributed, and is a frequent to a common tree. Brown's[43] report
for Fountain County should not be recognized without a verifying
specimen, since his list was compiled from a list of common names of the
trees which he obtained.

[Illustration: Plate 55.

QUERCUS FALCATA Michaux. Spanish Oak. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--Wood and uses similar to that of red oak. In Indiana it is
all sold as red oak. In all parts of its range in Indiana it is known as
red or black oak. However, the best accepted common name of this species
throughout its range is Spanish oak, and since no other species is known
by this name, it should be used for this species.

The bark of this species varies considerably in color and tightness. The
leaves are exceedingly variable in form. The leaves on the same tree
will vary from 3-lobed to 11-lobed. Usually the lobing is deepest in the
leaves nearest the top of the tree. Leaves of small trees, coppice
shoots, and of the lower branches of some trees are often all or for the
greater part 3-lobed. The color of the pubescence of the lower surface
of the leaves varies from a gray to a yellow-gray. The variations have
lead authors to divide this polymorphic species into several species and
varieties. The author has included all the forms that occur in Indiana
under one name.

This species is variously known as _Quercus digitata_, _Quercus
triloba_, _Quercus pagodaefolia_, and by the most recent authors as
_Quercus pagoda_ and _Quercus rubra_ and its varieties. Specimens in the
author's collection from Jefferson County were reported by Sargent[44]
as _Quercus rubra_ var. _triloba_.

=17.= =Quercus marilándica= Muenchhausen. Black Jack Oak. Plate 56.
Mature trees generally 10-30 cm. in diameter; bark resembles that of a
gnarled black oak; twigs generally scurvy-pubescent the first year;
leaves on petioles from nearly sessile to 2.5 cm. long, usually less
than a cm. long, blades 7-15 cm. long, broadly obovate, often almost as
wide as long, narrowly rounded at the base, with three primary lobes at
the apex, sometimes with two small lateral lobes, the apex is sometimes
almost rounded and the position where the lobes usually occur is
indicated by three primary veins which end in a bristle, the apex of the
leaf is generally about equally divided into three lobes by two very
shallow rounded sinuses, the lobes are rounded or merely acute;
sometimes the terminal lobes develop a secondary lobe, leaves very
pubescent both above and beneath when they first appear, becoming smooth
and glossy above at maturity, and remaining more or less pubescent
beneath; acorns sessile or nearly so, single or in pairs; nuts ovoid or
oblong, 1-1.5 cm. long, broadly rounded at the base, rounded or somewhat
conic at the apex, enclosed for about half their length in the
cup-shaped cup; scales blunt, not closely appressed, pubescent on back,
light reddish-brown; kernel bitter.

[Illustration: Plate 56.

QUERCUS MARILANDICA Muenchhausen. Black Jack Oak. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--New York to Nebraska, south to Florida and west to
Texas. In Indiana it is known to the author from Sullivan, Greene and
Clark Counties and southwestward. It has been reported from Jefferson
County by Barnes which is no doubt correct. Doubtful records are those
by Brown for Fountain County, Miami County by Gorby, and Phinney's
report for the area of Delaware, Jay, Randolph and Wayne Counties. It
has been reported for the vicinity of Chicago by Higley and Raddin. It
may be local on sterile, sandy ridges of the northern part of the State,
but very local if it does occur. It is generally found in very poor soil
on the crest of ridges associated with black and post oak. However, it
has been found in Greene, Sullivan and Knox counties on sand ridges and
at the base of sand ridges associated with black and post oak. The
species has a very limited mass distribution and is only occasionally
found and in colonies of a few trees each.

=Remarks.=--Trees too small and scarce to be of any economic importance.




ULMÀCEAE. The Elm Family.


Trees or shrubs with simple, alternate, 2-ranked, petioled leaves;
sepals 3-9, petals none, stamens as many as the sepals and opposite
them, stigmas 2.

  Branchlets with solid pith; leaves with primary veins
      parallel; flowers borne on the twigs of the preceding
      season                                                1 Ulmus.

  Branchlets with chambered pith at the nodes; leaves
      3-veined at the base; flowers borne on the twigs of
      the season                                            2 Celtis.


1. ÚLMUS. The Elms.

Trees with furrowed bark; leaves short petioled, with lateral veins
prominent and parallel, oblique or unequally heart-shaped at the base,
taper-pointed at the apex, mostly double-serrate; flowers of Indiana
species expanding before the leaves in March or April; fruit a samara
surrounded with a wide membranous margin, maturing in the spring.

  Inner bark mucilaginous; leaves very rough above; flowers
      nearly sessile; fruit not ciliate                     1 U. fulva.

  Inner bark not mucilaginous; leaves smooth or somewhat rough
      above; flowers on slender pedicils; fruit ciliate.

  Branches without corky wings; sides of samara glabrous    2 U. americana.

  Branches (at least some of them) with corky wings; at least
      one side of the samara pubescent.

    Buds ovate, not twice as long as wide, obtuse, or
        short-pointed, dark brown; scales pubescent and
        ciliate; leaves usually not twice as long as wide,
        base of petiole glabrous beneath; calyx lobes 7-9   3 U. Thomasi.

    Buds small, narrow, twice as long as wide, very
        sharp-pointed, light brown; scales glabrous or
        merely puberulent; leaves usually twice as long
        as wide, base of petiole pubescent all around       4 U. alata.

=1. Ulmus fúlva= Michaux. Slippery Elm. Red Elm. Plate 57. Fairly large
trees with deeply fissured reddish-brown bark without white streaks
between the layers of the ridges, twigs very pubescent and green at
first, becoming gray or reddish-brown at the end of the season and
remaining more or less pubescent for a year or more; buds ovate, a very
dark reddish brown, the scales more or less pubescent; leaves ovate,
oval or slightly obovate, average blades 8-15 cm. long, hairy on both
surfaces at first, remaining more or less pubescent beneath until
maturity, and becoming very rough above with a few scattered hairs
remaining, fragrant when dried, fragrance remaining for years; fruit
ripening the last of April or the first of May before or with the
unfolding of the leaves; samara orbicular or obovate, usually longer
than wide, average size 13-17 mm. long and 9-12 mm. wide, the margin as
wide or wider than the seed, margin glabrous, seed densely pubescent on
both sides; wood hard, strong, light when well seasoned and not warping
as badly as white elm.

=Distribution.=--Quebec south to Florida, west to Texas, Nebraska and
North Dakota. Found in all parts of Indiana. In the prairies or in the
"flats" it may be absent in one or more contiguous counties and may be
entirely absent on the crests and upper slopes of ridges. It prefers a
moist well drained soil, and where it is found it is usually a frequent
to a common tree, although rarely is it found as a very common tree. It
is usually associated with sugar maple, beech, white ash, linn, tulip,
white oak, etc.

=Remarks.=--This tree usually is from 3-6 dm. in diameter and tall for
its diameter. However, larger trees occur. In the Ind. Geol. Rept.
6:70:1875 mention is made of a tree in Jackson County that was "18 feet
in circumference." The uses of the wood are similar to that of white
elm. The inner bark collected in spring is much used in medicine under
the name of slippery elm.

[Illustration: Plate 57.

ULMUS FULVA Michaux. Red or Slippery Elm. (× 1/2.)]

=2. Ulmus americàna= Linnæus. White Elm. Plate 58. Large trees; bark
deeply fissured, gray, the ridges showing white streaks between the
layers; twigs more or less hairy at first and usually becoming glabrous
by the end of the season; buds ovate, acute and glabrous; leaves ovate,
oval or obovate, average blades 8-12 cm. long, hairy on both sides on
expanding, becoming at maturity glabrous above and smooth or rough,
sometimes very rough on vigorous young shoots, remaining pubescent
beneath, rarely glabrous; fruit ripening before or as the leaves unfold,
generally oval in shape, about 1 cm. long, both surfaces glabrous,
margins about as wide as the seed and fringed with hairs; wood hard,
tough, flexible, generally hard to split, warps badly in seasoning.

=Distribution.=--Quebec to Florida, west to Texas and Nebraska. Found
throughout Indiana, and doubtless in every county. It is frequent to
common or very common on the flood plains of streams, in wet woods and
in low ground generally.

=Remarks.=--This species is also called water elm, swamp elm, gray elm,
bitter elm, sour elm and in southwestern counties it is often called red
elm. In Perry County it is often called hub elm. It is generally known
as "elm" and when this term is used, it refers to this species. The wood
has a very wide range of uses. The greatest amount has been used for
hoops, staves and heading. Large quantities have been used in the
manufacture of agricultural implements, hubs, furniture, basket handles,
etc. White elm is usually considered very difficult to split, but I was
informed by a pioneer timber cutter that the heart wood of the veterans
of the forest splits as well as oak, and that he worked many a tree up
into staves. He told me that he made into staves a tree in Paulding
County, Ohio, that was eight feet in diameter at the stump. There is
little attempt being made by woodlot owners to propagate this tree.
However, the natural propagation of the species is probably greater than
any other species because it produces seed at an early age, and culls of
the forest are not cut because they are not good for fuel which leaves
them to produce seed. Then the seed are light, and are scattered to
great distances by the wind and water. It is propagated very easily from
seedlings.

The tree when grown in the open has a tendency to be bushy and unless it
is given some pruning will have a very short clear trunk. It has always
been regarded as one of the best species for shade tree planting. For
beauty of form it is not excelled by any tree for shade or ornamental
planting. However, it has several insect enemies that require spraying
to keep them under control.

[Illustration: Plate 58.

ULMUS AMERICANA Linnæus. White Elm. (× 1/2.)]

=3. Ulmus Thomási= Sargent. Hickory Elm. Rock Elm. Plate 59. Large
trees; bark deeply fissured and grayish like the bark of the white elm;
twigs light brown, generally densely hairy and remaining more or less
pubescent until the end of the season or later, the twigs of some
specimens are glabrous or only slightly hairy at first and soon become
glabrous and somewhat glaucous, after the first year some of the
branchlets begin to develop 1-4 corky ridges from a few millimeters to 5
or 6 mm. in thickness, the ridges are wide and rounded at the top, dark
gray, brown and discontinuous, rarely a corky ridge will appear on a
branchlet the first year; leaves oval or obovate, average blades 8-15
cm. long, at maturity glabrous and smooth or rough to very rough above,
permanently pubescent beneath especially on the veins; fruit ripens late
in May or early in June when the leaves are from 1/2 to 2/3 grown;
samara oval, usually 1.5-2 cm. long, oblique at the base, with a beak
2-5 mm. long at the apex, both faces pubescent, wing about as wide as
the seed; wood hard heavy, strong, flexible, uses the same as white elm.

=Distribution.=--Southern Quebec and Ontario south to northern New
Jersey and west to Minnesota and Missouri. The distribution in Indiana
has not been studied. The frequency of its occurrence is not known, and
all of the known stations are given. The published records are as
follows: Dearborn (Collins); Franklin (Meyncke); Hamilton (Wilson);
Jefferson (Barnes) and (Deam); Noble (VanGorder); Parke (Hobbs); St.
Joseph (Nieuwland); Steuben (Bradner); Wayne (Petry and Markle); Wells
(Deam). Additional records are Hendricks, Noble, Ripley, Vermillion and
Wayne by Deam. The published record for Posey County by Deam and Schneck
should be referred to _Ulmus alata_. It prefers a well drained soil and
is most frequently found near the base of the slope or on the top of
flood plain banks of streams, in ravines, or in a habitat like a
beech-sugar maple woods. It is reported to have been frequent in
Franklin, Noble and Wells Counties.

Its appearance and habit of growth is so much like the white elm that it
is not commonly distinguished from it, which accounts for the lack of
definite knowledge of its range in our area.

[Illustration: Plate 59.

ULMUS THOMASI Sargent. Hickory or Rock Elm. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 60.

ULMUS ALATA Michaux. Winged Elm. (× 1/2.)]

=4. Ulmus alàta= Michaux. Winged Elm. Plate 60. Small to medium sized
trees; bark rather closely fissured, grayish or reddish-brown, in
appearance like white elm; twigs hairy at first, generally remaining
more or less pubescent throughout the season, rarely becoming entirely
glabrous before the end of the season, a light brown gradually becoming
a gray-brown; branchlets usually begin to develop two thin narrow corky
ridges, becoming by the end of the second year 4-7 mm. thick, the year's
growth of corky layer a light brown, the older layers a darker brown,
the two main corky ridges are on opposite sides of the twigs, and
between these there are generally additional corky excrescences,
especially on the older branches; leaves oblong-lanceolate or oval, some
somewhat falcate, average blades 4-8 cm. long, pubescent on both sides
on unfolding, becoming at maturity glabrous or nearly so above, some are
rough above at maturity, remaining pubescent until maturity beneath;
petioles short, generally 2-3 mm. long, rarely 5 mm. or longer; fruit
ripening before or with the unfolding of the leaves; samara 6-10 mm.
long, pubescent on both faces.

=Distribution.=--Virginia west through southern Indiana to southern
Missouri, south to the Gulf and west to Texas. In Indiana it is confined
to the southwestern part of the State. Gorby's report for Miami should
be ignored. It has been reported as far north as Vigo and Monroe
Counties by Blatchley, and as far east as Clark County by Baird and
Taylor. The author has collected it in Crawford, Dubois, Martin, Orange,
Perry, Posey, Spencer and Warrick Counties.

The tree has two rather distinct habitats. In the hill counties it is
found on the sides of cliffs, steep slopes or on the top of the ridges
with such species as the black, chestnut and scarlet oaks and chestnut.
In this habitat it is usually a small scrubby tree with an excessive
number of side branches. Such specimens usually have the corky ridges
well developed on all of the branches and the tree presents a weird
appearance. The second habitat is in the hard clay flats of the
southwestern counties. In Warrick County along Big Pigeon Creek west of
Boonville I measured a specimen 21 dm. in circumference and I estimated
the clear bole at 8 m. It was associated with sweet gum, black gum,
white elm, red birch, red oak, etc. It is found throughout this county
both in the "flats" and on the sandy ridges. In Posey County it is a
frequent tree in the low woods about 10 miles southwest of Mt. Vernon.
In these woods it acquires a diameter of 3-6 dm. and is associated with
post oak, Spanish oak, sweet gum, shingle oak, etc. It is to be noted
that specimens that grow in these conditions and those that acquire a
large size do not develop such conspicuous corky branches. A large tree
over 6 dm. in diameter was noted in the eastern part of Gibson County
growing in low sandy soil which was destitute of corky branches so far
as could be seen from the ground. All of the branches examined were free
from corky ridges, and only a few corky excrescences were present. The
specimen could easily be identified by the leaves. Another large tree 12
dm. in circumference in a black oak woods 4 miles south of Marengo in
Crawford County was also free from corky ridges.

This is an interesting tree and requires further study to establish its
range in Indiana and to learn its habits. In Jasper, Indiana, it is a
frequent shade tree. No doubt the trees were obtained from a nearby
woods along the Patoka River where this species is known to occur.


=2. CÉLTIS.= The Hackberries.

Trees with pith of branchlets chambered; flowers in Indiana species
appear before the leaves, the leaves generally with 3 primary veins at
the base; staminate flowers usually in clusters, the pistillate solitary
or few together in the axils of the leaves, and near the end of the
twigs; fruit a globose drupe, sometimes elongated, pulp thin and sweet,
frequently remaining on the tree until late winter, relished by birds;
stone bony, wrinkled.

Some of the American species of hackberry are very variable. The habitat
of the species varies from deep swamps to arid rocky slopes. In fact, a
single species as now understood may have a variable habitat. The
following variations may be noted on the same tree or on different trees
of the same species. The twigs may be glabrous, or pubescent; the leaves
may vary in size, shape and texture, leaf margin, and in the roughness
or smoothness of the surfaces; the petioles may be smooth or hairy; the
pedicels may be glabrous or pubescent, shorter or longer than the
petioles; the fruit also varies in shape. Leaves have been seen on the
same tree which were smooth above, while others were quite rough above,
the difference being due to the exposure to light.

The original descriptions of the species are too short to sufficiently
characterize the species, which adds to the confusion. However, C. S.
Sargent[45] has recently revised the species and varieties of our area.

Prof. Sargent has examined and named all of my material for me. Mr. B.
F. Bush, who has extensively studied the hackberries in the field, also
has examined my specimens.

The writer has paid special attention to the hackberries of the State
for the past few years and is still in doubt as to the status of the
species that occur in the State. Since I am not following the
determinations made by Sargent and Bush, and am following the
nomenclature of the first edition, I regard the present treatment as
tentative only.

  Margins of all the leaves sharply serrate all around
      except at base; nutlets 6-8 mm. long              1 C. occidentalis.

  Margins of leaves of fruiting branches generally entire,
      or some with a few teeth on one side or with a few
      teeth on both sides; margins of the leaves of
      vegetative branches and shoots similar to those of
      fruiting branches or with the margins serrate nearly
      all around; nutlets 5-6 mm. long.

  Leaves of a rather broad ovate type; mature fruit a
      dark cherry-red; usually shrubs, sometimes very
      small trees, of a dry habitat                     2 C. pumila.

  Leaves of an ovate-lanceolate type; mature fruit a
      light cherry-red; medium-sized trees of a wet
      habitat                                           3 C.
                                                          mississippiensis.

[Illustration: Plate 61.

CELTIS OCCIDENTALIS Linnæus. Hackberry. (x 1/2.)]

=1. Celtis occidentàlis= Linnæus. Hackberry. Plate 61. Medium to
large-sized trees; bark of old trees irregularly furrowed, sometimes
some of the surface warty and rough; twigs smooth or pubescent, the
fruiting ones generally smooth; leaves of an ovate type on petioles
0.5-2 cm. long, the blades of fruiting twigs 5-15 cm. long, those of
vegetative twigs sometimes larger, oblique or slightly cordate at base,
gradually tapering to a point at apex, or long acuminate at the apex,
often becoming thick at maturity, especially those exposed to full
sunlight, generally smooth above at maturity, especially those of
fruiting twigs, or sometimes rough, especially those of vegetative
branchlets or those growing in the shade, the under surface more or less
pubescent along the veins at maturity; fruit matures in late autumn,
very dark red, sometimes appearing almost black, globose or somewhat
oblong, generally about 9-10 mm. in diameter, borne on pedicels which
are longer or up to twice as long as the petioles; the pedicels which
are always ascending are straight or somewhat curved upwards; nutlets
globose, a little longer than wide.

=Distribution.=--Valley of the St. Lawrence River, southern Ontario, to
North Dakota, and south to the Gulf States and west to Texas. More or
less frequent along streams throughout the State, except in the hilly
counties of the southern part of the State. It is always found in moist
soil, except in the hilly counties where it may be found on wooded
slopes or on high rocky bluffs bordering streams. In all of our area the
species is practically confined to drainage basins, and is generally
close to streams.

=Remarks.=--The wood is yellowish-white and before seasoning very much
resembles ash for which it was generally sold. It has good bending
qualities and is now much sought after for hoops. It was formerly often
known as hoop ash. The supply is now becoming scarce, but when bought
sells for the same price as good white elm.

Some writers include under the name _Celtis occidentalis_ only those
forms which are small trees and have ovate, short-pointed leaves. This
type of tree has not been found in Indiana. The form with long acuminate
pointed leave which is the common form in our area, is regarded as a
variety of _Celtis occidentalis_. Trees having the upper surface of the
leaves very rough are called _Celtis crassifolia_ Lamarck, or are merely
regarded as a variety of _Celtis occidentalis_. This form is found
throughout our area.

The hackberry is sometimes used as a shade tree. It can scarcely be
recommended because its leaves and twigs are often affected by galls
which detract from its appearance.

[Illustration: Plate 62.

CELTIS PUMILA var. DEAMII Sargent. Dwarf Hackberry. (× 1/2.)]

=2. Celtis pùmila= (Muhlenberg) Pursh. Dwarf Hackberry. Plate 62. Bark
thin, smooth and gray on shrub-like forms, warty or deeply fissured on
the larger forms; ridges flat and broken, dark gray-brown; twigs at
first hairy, becoming smooth or nearly so by autumn; leaves of an ovate
type, broadly-ovate, oblong-ovate to narrow ovate, on petioles 0.5-1.5
cm. long, blades of fruiting branchlets 3-10 cm. long, those of sterile
twigs sometimes larger, oblique, rounded or somewhat cordate at the
base, taper-pointed, sometimes acuminate at the apex, margins entire or
with a few teeth usually about or above the middle, becoming thick and
smooth above at maturity, sometimes rough, especially on vigorous
shoots, generally somewhat pubescent along the veins beneath; fruit
matures late in the autumn, usually an orange or light cherry color late
in summer, becoming a very dark cherry color late in the autumn, globose
to ellipsoidal, on pedicels about as long as the petioles; sometimes the
pedicels are shorter but usually about one-half longer; pedicels
generally ascending, rarely recurved, when recurved the pedicels are
short.

=Distribution.=--Pennsylvania to northern Illinois, south to Florida and
west to Arkansas. Local in Indiana. It has been collected by the writer
in Lake County near the mouth of the Grand Calumet River where it was
collected by E. J. Hill who has given us the most detailed account of
this species.[46] Also collected on a high, gravelly hill on the east
side of Hog-back Lake, Steuben County; on a rocky wooded slope in
Hamar's Hollow southeast of Mitchell in Lawrence County; on a "knob" in
Floyd County; on a rocky wooded slope near Big Spring in Washington
County; frequent on a rocky wooded slope near the Ohio River east of
Elizabeth in Harrison County; on the bank of Blue River near Milltown in
Crawford County; and in Perry County along the bluffs of the Ohio River
about six miles east of Cannelton, and also on the crest of a ridge
about six miles southwest of Derby. It has also been reported by
Nieuwland for Clark in Marshall County.

=Remarks.=--This species is usually a small shrub, and usually bears
fruit when only 1.5-2 meters (5 or 6 feet) tall. Only a few trees have
been seen that were 40 cm. (4 inches) in diameter. The small size at
which this species fruits, easily distinguishes it from other species in
our area. Its habitat also serves to distinguish it. Along Lake Michigan
it grows on the dry sand dunes, and in southern Indiana it grows on dry
rocky slopes.

Sargent who has examined all of my specimens credits Indiana with the
typical species, and separates from it a form which he calls _Celtis
pumila_ variety _Deamii_[47]. This variety is based upon my No. 18,727,
and the type specimen has been photographed to illustrate this species.
The writer is not able to separate the two forms in our area, and
believes that all belong either to _Celtis pumila_ or to the new
variety.

=3. Celtis mississippiénsis= Bosc. (_Celtis laevigata_ Willdenow).
Sugarberry. Hackberry. Plate 63. Medium sized trees with the bark of the
trunk of large trees irregularly covered with wart-like excrescences,
rarely somewhat irregularly fissured, bark of the upper part of trunk
and larger branches resembling that of the beech; leaves of an
ovate-lanceolate type, as a whole narrower than the preceding species;
on petioles 5-12 mm. long, blades of fruiting twigs 4-8 cm. long,
usually rounded at the base, sometimes oblique, slightly cordate or
somewhat narrowed at the base, usually gradually long-taper pointed at
apex, margins generally entire, rarely a few teeth toward the apex,
green on both surfaces, generally mature leaves are smooth above and
below, more rarely somewhat rough above, and with some pubescence along
the veins beneath; fruit in late summer an orange red color, gradually
becoming darker until late autumn when it becomes red; pedicels shorter
or longer than the petioles, usually slightly longer and ascending,
fruit nearly globose, a trifle smaller than the preceding, and about
two-thirds as large as the first.

=Distribution.=--Virginia, southern Indiana, Missouri, eastern Kansas,
south to the Gulf States and west to Texas. In Indiana it is confined to
the southwestern counties. It is now known to definitely occur in
Sullivan, Gibson, Posey, Warrick and Spencer Counties. Two trees were
noted also, in the Muscatatuck bottoms near Delany Creek in Washington
County. A "single bush about eight feet high" was reported from
Jefferson County by Young. This may have been the preceding species. It
was also reported by Haymond from Franklin County.

=Remarks.=--With one exception all the specimens of this species have
been found in very low ground. Usually it is associated with such low
ground species as pecan, sweet gum, swell-butt ash, and the cane. One
very peculiar specimen was found on the crest of a ridge about seven
miles north of Salem in Washington County. It was a tree about fifteen
feet tall, and had very narrow entire leaves.




=MORÀCEAE.= The Mulberry Family.


Trees or shrubs with a milky sap; leaves simple, alternate, petioled,
3-5 nerved at the base; fruit fleshy.

  Branches without spines; leaves serrate; pistillate
      flowers in spikes                                     1 Morus.

  Branches with spines; leaves entire; pistillate flowers
      in heads.                                             2 Maclura.

[Illustration: Plate 63.

CELTIS MISSISSIPPIENSIS Bosc. Sugarberry. (× 1/2.)]


=1. MÒRUS.= The Mulberries.

Trees with leaves 3-nerved at the base; flowers of two kinds on
different branches of the same tree or on different trees; the staminate
in long catkins, calyx 4-parted, petals none, stamens 4, the pistillate
catkins short; fruit an aggregate of drupes.

  Leaves softly pubescent beneath                           1 M. rubra.

  Leaves glabrous beneath, or with a few hairs on the veins
      or in the axils                                       2 M. alba.


=1. Morus rùbra Linnæus.= Red Mulberry. Plate 64. Medium sized trees
with short trunks and round heads; twigs at first green and puberulent,
soon becoming glabrous and later usually turning gray; leaves ovate or
somewhat orbicular, frequently 2-3 lobed, average mature blades 10-15
cm. long, more or less cordate at the base, abruptly taper-pointed,
rough and glabrous above and finely pubescent beneath; fruit ripening in
June or July, 1.5-3 cm. long, dark purple or nearly black, edible; wood
light, soft, rather tough, coarse-grained, and durable in contact with
the soil.

=Distribution.=--Southern Ontario west to eastern Dakotas, south to the
Gulf States and west to Texas. Found throughout Indiana, although there
are no records for the extreme northwestern counties. Throughout our
area it must be regarded as infrequent. It is only here and there that
you find a tree, and I have never seen it where there were even a small
number of trees close together. In the northern part of the State it is
usually found in a moist well drained soil, associated with trees such
as beech and sugar maple, or in lower ground with slippery elm and linn.
It has no particular affinity for streams. In the southern part of the
State it is found in both rich and poor soils. However, it is most often
met with near the base of slopes.

=Remarks.=--This tree seldom has a clear bole of more than 3-5 m. and is
usually a tree about 20 cm. in diameter, rarely as large as 6 dm. in
diameter, although there is a record[48] of a tree in Georgia that was
"7 feet in diameter at 3 feet above the ground."

The wood has been a favorite for fence posts since pioneer times. It
transplants easily. The fruit is a favorite with birds and for this
reason it should be planted about orchards and in woodlots. It is
sometimes called the red mulberry to distinguish it from the following
species.[49]

[Illustration: Plate 64.

MORUS RUBRA Linnæus. Red Mulberry. (× 1/2.)]


=2. MACLÙRA.= The Osage Orange.

=Maclura pomífera= (Rafinesque) Schneider. Hedge. Osage Orange.
(_Toxylon pomiferum Raf._) Plate 65. Trees with brown shreddy bark on
old trees; mature twigs greenish gray, zigzag; spines about 10-15 mm.
long; leaves ovate to oblong lanceolate, average blades 7-12 cm. long,
wedge-shape, rounded or cordate at the base, long taper-pointed at the
apex, margins entire, pubescent on both sides while young, becoming at
maturity lustrous and glabrous above, remaining pubescent beneath; fruit
globose, about 1 dm. in diameter; wood heavy, very hard and strong, the
most durable in contact with the soil of any of our post timbers.

=Distribution.=--Missouri and Kansas south to Texas. Introduced into
Indiana for hedge fences. There is some question as to the ability of
this species to escape. I have heard that it frequently sends up root
shoots at several feet from hedge fences, and that it frequently seeds
itself along old hedge fences. For the past few years I have given the
species especial attention and I have never seen it as an escape except
in three instances.

=Remarks.=--This species was formerly much planted for farm fences, but
since land has become so valuable, its use has been discontinued, and
the old fences are being dug up. The tree grows a short trunk, and one
was noted in Grant County that was at least 6 dm. in diameter that was
estimated to be less than fifty years old. This species is subject to
the San Jose scale and in some localities it has been killed by it. It
has been but little used for forest planting, and the plantations are
not yet old enough to measure their success.

[Illustration: Plate 65.

MACLURA POMIFERA (Rafinesque). Schneider. Osage Orange. (× 1/2.)]




=MAGNOLIÀCEAE.= The Magnolia Family.


Trees or shrubs with alternate and petioled leaves; flowers large,
terminal and solitary with numerous stamens and pistils.

  Buds silky white pubescent; leaves entire; fruit fleshy,
      dehiscent                                             1 Magnolia.

  Buds glabrous; leaves lobed; fruit a cone of dry carpels,
      indehiscent                                           2 Liriodendron.



=1. MAGNÒLIA.= The Magnolias.

=Magnolia acuminàta= Linnæus. Cucumber Tree. Plate 66. Large trees with
furrowed bark which is gray and much resembles the tulip tree except the
ridges are shallower and closer; twigs downy at first, becoming glabrous
or nearly so and a light to a cherry brown by the end of the season;
leaves oval, average blades 15-22 cm. long, rounded to truncate at the
base, abruptly short-pointed, pubescent on both sides at first, becoming
glabrous above, and remaining pubescent beneath, rarely entirely
glabrous; flowers about 6 cm. long, bell-shaped, pale yellowish-green;
fruit cylindrical, 5-7 cm. long, 1-2 cm. diameter, the large scarlet
seeds begin to push out of their receptacle in September; wood light,
soft, not strong, close-grained and durable.

=Distribution.=--North shore of Lake Erie, western New York, eastern
Ohio, southern Indiana, southern Illinois and along the Appalachian
Mountains to southern Alabama and west to Arkansas. It doubtless
occurred in all or nearly all of the counties in southern Indiana south
of a line drawn from Franklin to Knox Counties. It no doubt was
extremely local. For instance a pioneer 81 years old who had always
lived in Washington County told me that there were two trees on his farm
near Pekin, and these were the only two trees he knew of in the
vicinity. These trees were popular because the neighbors came for the
fruit to put into whisky for making bitters which were a specific for
all ailments. I have seen only a shrub on the Forest Reserve in Clark
County. On a beech and sugar maple ridge about 4 miles northwest of
Medora in Jackson County on the Geo. W. Scott farm two trees were still
standing in 1915. Mr. Scott, a pioneer, said the species was found on
the ridge for about 2 miles and that there were about a half dozen trees
to the acre, and the largest was about a meter in diameter. It is known
in two other places in this county. A tree is still standing in Lawrence
County on the Sam Mitchell farm 2-1/2 miles south of Bedford. Mr.
Mitchell is a pioneer and says that a few trees were found in the
vicinity on the ridges. It has been reported for Franklin, Floyd and
Jefferson Counties. There is hearsay evidence that it occurred in other
counties.

[Illustration: Plate 66.

MAGNOLIA ACUMINATA Linnæus. Cucumber Tree. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--The cucumber tree has been too rare in Indiana to be of
economic importance. The greatest interest with us is its distribution.
The uses of the wood are similar to that of tulip with which it is
botanically related. It is said that the greater part of the lumber
which is produced in the south is sold as tulip. The seeds of this tree
are extremely bitter and no bird, squirrel or mouse will carry or touch
them. However, man after macerating them in whisky can use them for
medicine.


=2. LIRIODÈNDRON.= The Tulip Tree.

=Liriodendron Tulipífera= Linnæus. Tulip. Yellow Poplar. Plate 67. Large
trees with deeply furrowed grayish bark; twigs glabrous and glaucous at
first, becoming reddish-brown by the end of the season, then gray or
dark brown; leaves very variable, 4-6 lobed, average blades 5-12 cm.
long, truncate and notched at the apex, more or less rounded, truncate
or cordate at the base, glabrous above and below at maturity or with a
few hairs on the veins beneath; flowers appear in May or June, large
bell-shaped, about 4 cm. deep, greenish-yellow, sometimes tinged with
orange-red; fruit upright, cone-shaped, 5-7 cm. long; wood light, weak,
soft, stiff, straight and moderately coarse-grained, seasons and works
well. Sap wood white, heart wood a light yellow.

=Distribution.=--Vermont, southern Ontario, southern Michigan, south to
Florida and west to Arkansas and Missouri. Found throughout Indiana, and
doubtless is found in every county. It is rare to infrequent in most of
the counties north of the Wabash River. It gradually becomes more
frequent toward the south and where its habitat is found it is frequent
to common. It prefers a moist rich well drained soil and thrives best in
protected coves and near the lower part of slopes of hills. It is found
with beech, sugar maple and white oak. It is rarely found in a black
loam soil, but prefers a sandy soil. It was generally a common tree and
of very large size in practically all of the counties in the southern
two-thirds of the State.

=Remarks.=--This tree is generally known by botanists as tulip tree. By
lumbermen it is usually known as yellow poplar, or more often shortened
to poplar. It is also known as blue, white and hickory poplar, or as
white wood. The tulip tree is the second largest tree of Indiana. In the
Ind. Geol. Rept. 6:70:1875, is the following: "I measured four poplar
trees that stood within a few feet of each other; the largest was
thirty-eight feet in circumference three feet from the ground, one
hundred and twenty feet high, and about sixty-five feet to the first
limb. The others were, respectively eighteen and a half, eighteen and
seventeen feet in circumference at three feet from the ground." The
range of the uses of the wood is not so great as the oak, but it has
many uses. The demand has been so great that practically all of the
large trees have been cut. Small trees have so much sap or white wood
that they are not sought for lumber, but can be used for pulp and
excelsior.

[Illustration: Plate 67.

LIRIODENDRON TULIPIFERA Linnæus. Tulip or Yellow Poplar. (× 1/2.)]

The tulip transplants easily, grows rapidly, tall and with short side
branches. Experiments in growing this tree indicate that it is one of
the very best trees for reinforcing the woodlot, and other forest
planting. It can be recommended for roadside planting because it grows
tall and has a deep root system. Where conditions of life are not too
severe it could be used for shade tree planting.




=ANONÀCEAE.= The Custard Apple Family.


=ASÍMINA.= The Pawpaw.

=Asímina tríloba= (Linnæus) Dunal. Pawpaw. Plate 68. Shrubs or small
trees; bark smooth except on very old trees when it becomes somewhat
furrowed; twigs at first covered with rusty brown hairs, becoming
glabrous and reddish-brown by the end of the season; leaves
obovate-lanceolate, average blades 16-30 cm. long, abruptly
taper-pointed, wedge-shape at base, margins entire, somewhat rusty
pubescent at first, becoming at maturity glabrous above, and glabrous or
nearly so beneath; flowers appear in May or early June, maroon color,
drooping; fruit edible, ripening in September and October, 7-13 cm.
long, greenish-yellow, smooth, pulp white or yellow, with a few large,
dark-brown flattened seeds; wood light, soft and weak.

=Distribution.=--New York, north shore of Lake Erie, southern Michigan,
Nebraska, south to Florida and west to Texas. Found in all parts of
Indiana, although it is found in the greatest abundance in the central
counties. It prefers a moist rich soil, although it is quite adaptive.
Sometimes it is found in a black loam soil in low woods or about lakes,
but its preference is for a beech and sugar maple woods or habitats
approximating it. In the southern counties it is absent on the sterile
wooded ridges, but may be a common shrub at the base of the slopes. It
is a constant companion of the tulip tree and where one will grow the
other is likely to be found. It is a great tree to send up suckers,
hence it is always found in clumps, or forms real thickets. This species
with us is usually 2-7 meters high; however, there are records of large
trees. Collett in Ind. Geol. Rept. 5:404:1874, in a geological report of
Gibson County says: "A forest of pawpaw bushes attracted our attention
by their tree-like size, being nearly a foot in diameter."

[Illustration: Plate 68.

ASIMINA TRILOBA (Linnæus) Dunal. Pawpaw. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--This species is also known as the yellow and white pawpaw.
Recently some enthusiasts have christened it the "Hoosier Banana". There
has been an attempt for years to cultivate the pawpaw, and some
varieties have been named. The fruit is variable. The one with a white
pulp is rather insipid and is not considered good to eat. The form with
a yellow pulp is the kind that is regarded as the most palatable. The
two forms are not botanically separated but Prof. Stanley Coulter has
made some observations on the two forms in the Ind. Geol. Rept.
24:745:1899. He says: "Two forms, not separated botanically are
associated in our area. They differ in time of flowering, in size,
shape, color and flavor of the fruit, in leaf shape, venation and odor
and color of the bark. They are of constant popular recognition and
probably separate species, never seeming to intergrade."

It is desirable for ornamental planning on account of its interesting
foliage, beautiful and unique flowers and delicious fruit. It is very
difficult to transplant a sucker plant, and in order to get a start of
this species it is best to plant the seed or seedlings. It is usually
found growing in the shade, but does well in full sunlight.

Mr. Arthur W. Osborn of Spiceland, who has done much experimental work
in propagating this species, reports some interesting cases of pawpaw
poisoning. He says he knew a lady whose skin would be irritated by the
presence of pawpaws. Some individuals after eating them develop a rash
with intense itching. In one instance he fed a person, subject to the
rash from eating the pawpaw, a peeled pawpaw with a spoon, and the
subject never touched the pawpaw, and the results were the same. The
American Genetic Association has taken up the subject of improving the
fruit of this tree, and there is no doubt but that in the future this
species will be of considerable economic importance. The tree is free
from all insect enemies, and since it can be grown in waste places,
there is no reason why it should not receive more attention than it
does.




=LAURÀCEAE.= The Laurel Family.


=SÁSSAFRAS.= The Sassafras.

=Sassafras officinàle= Nees and Ebermaier. Sassafras. Red Sassafras.
White Sassafras. Plate 69. Small to large trees; bark aromatic, smooth
on young trees, reddish-brown and deeply furrowed on old trees,
resembling that of black walnut; branchlets yellowish-green, splotched
more or less with sooty spots; twigs at first more or less hairy, soon
becoming smooth or remaining more or less hairy until autumn, more or
less glaucous, especially the smooth forms; buds more or less pubescent,
the axillary ones usually more or less hairy, the outer scales of the
terminal one usually smooth and glaucous; leaves simple, alternate,
ovate, elliptic to obovate, blades 5-16 cm. long, entire or with 1-5
lobes, narrowed at the base, the apex and terminal of the lobes acute,
both surfaces hairy when they expand, generally becoming smooth above
and beneath, or more often remaining more or less pubescent beneath, the
midrib and two lateral veins usually prominent beneath; petioles 0.5-5
cm. long, hairy at first, becoming smooth or more often retaining some
pubescence; flowers appear before or with the leaves in April or May,
small, yellow or greenish, the male and female generally on different
trees, on racemes up to 4 cm. long; flower stalks usually pubescent,
sometimes smooth; fruit an oblong, blue-black, glaucous berry which
matures late in summer; fruit generally 7-10 mm. long, on a stalk
including the pedicel and raceme up to 9 cm. long.

[Illustration: Plate 69.

SASSAFRAS OFFICINALE Nees and Ebermaier. Sassafras. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Maine, southern Ontario to Iowa and south to Florida
and west to Texas. No doubt it was formerly found in every county of
Indiana. In the northern part of the State it is more local in its
distribution than in the southern counties. In the northern counties
where it is local it is found in colonies on sandy or clayey ridges.
Sassafras is usually considered an indicator of poorer soils, hence, in
the central counties it is often very local. It is frequent to common
throughout the hilly counties of the southern part of the State. In this
part of the State it becomes a pernicious weed tree. It soon invades
fence rows and fallow fields, and is extremely difficult to kill out. It
is rarely found in wet situations; however, in Sullivan and Clay
Counties large trees have been observed in low alluvial ground,
associated with the white elm, etc.

=Remarks.=--Wood light, soft, coarse-grained, aromatic, heartwood
brownish. In our area sassafras wood is used principally for posts and
crossties. The roots contain a volatile oil which is much used in
medicine and perfumery. Every one is familiar with the sassafras peddler
who in the Spring sells a small bundle of roots or bark for making
sassafras tea. The tea is reputed "to thin the blood." The aromatic
character of the wood led the earliest inhabitants to attribute many
medicinal and other qualities to the wood which, in many instances
bordered on superstition. In some of the southern States bedsteads were
made of sassafras with the belief that they would produce sounder sleep.
Floors were made of sassafras to keep out the rats and mice. Perches of
chicken houses were made of sassafras poles to keep off the lice. To
successfully make soap, it was necessary to stir the contents of the
kettle with a sassafras stick.

The sassafras is usually about one-fourth of a meter in diameter.
However, on the Charles Hole farm about three miles southeast of
Butlerville grew two of the largest trees of which we have record. The
trees grew within seven meters of each other on a slope now grown up
with large sugar maple. They were cut by Mr. Hole's father, on whose
farm they were located. The largest was cut in the later sixties and the
smaller in the early seventies. The stumps were seen by the writer in
1918. Both are now hollow although the outside is quite solid after
having been cut about fifty years. Chips were cut from the root spurs
and the wood was almost as aromatic as if the tree had just been cut.
"The stumps have been burned at least three times," says Mr. Hole, yet
the smaller now measures 1.09 m. (43 inches) in diameter at a meter
high. The largest stump now measures 1.22 m. (48 inches), in diameter at
a meter high. Mr. Hole says that the smallest tree had a clear hole of
at least 18 meters, and the largest tree was .92 m. (36 inches) in
diameter 20 meters from the stump.

Sassafras deserves more consideration than it has received as a shade
and ornamental tree. The autumnal coloring of its foliage is scarcely
surpassed by any tree; and it is free from injurious insect pests. It
adapts itself to almost all kinds of soils, and grows rapidly. It is,
however, transplanted with difficulty; this means only more care in
digging the tree and planting it.

Commonly the sassafras is classed as red and white sassafras. The roots
of the white sassafras are said to be whiter, the aroma of the wood has
a suggestion of camphor, and the wood is less durable. This belief is
common throughout the area of its distribution, but so far as the writer
knows, no scientific work has been published to verify this division of
the species.

Sassafras is extremely variable, but most botanical authors have
considered the many variations as one species. Nuttall in 1818 was the
first author to make a division of the forms, and he has been followed
by some recent authors. Nuttall separated those forms with smooth twigs,
buds, and under surface of leaves, from those with pubescent twigs,
buds, and under surface of leaves. Nieuwland[50] separates a variety
from the smooth forms which he calls =Sassafras albida= variety
=glauca=, and reports it as occurring in the counties in the vicinity of
Lake Michigan.

The writer has at hand 46 specimens from 41 counties in Indiana,
including all of the Lake Michigan Counties, and he has not been able to
find a single character that is constant enough to make a division of
our forms, consequently all the Indiana forms are included under one and
the old name for sassafras.

[Illustration: Plate 70.

LIQUIDAMBAR STYRACIFLUA Linnæus. Sweet or Red Gum. (× 1/2.)]




=ALTINGIÀCEAE.= Sweet Gum Family.


=Liquidámbar Styracíflua= Linnæus. Sweet Gum. Plate 70. Large trees with
resinous sap; bark deeply furrowed, grayish; twigs when very young
somewhat hairy, soon becoming glabrous, a light reddish-brown by the end
of the season, later a gray, usually some or all of the branchlets
develop one or more corky ridges running lengthwise of the branchlets,
or in some cases only corky excrescences; leaves simple, alternate,
long-petioled, orbicular in outline, cleft into 5 wedge-shaped lobes,
rarely 7 lobes, average blades 5-12 cm. long, truncate or cordate at the
base, margins finely serrate, hairy on both surfaces on unfolding, soon
becoming glabrous above, and remaining more or less hairy beneath
especially in the axils of the veins, at maturity turning to a dull or
brilliant red; flowers in heads, expanding in April or May; fruit a
globular, horny aggregate of carpels, 3-4 cm. in diameter including the
horns; wood heavy, hard, not strong, close-grained, inclined to shrink
and warp in seasoning, takes a good polish, heart wood a rich brown
which can be finished to imitate walnut or mahogany.

=Distribution.=--Connecticut, southern Ohio to Missouri, south to
Florida and west to Texas, and in the mountains in Mexico south to
Guatemala. In Indiana it is confined to wet woods in the southern half
of the State. The most northern records are from Franklin, Shelby,
Putnam and Parke Counties. Wherever it is found it is usually a frequent
to a common or very common tree. It is most frequently associated with
the beech, but in the very wet woods it is found with pin oak, red
birch, cow oak and white elm.

=Remarks.=--This species grows rapidly; is somewhat hard to transplant;
grows straight and tall with few side branches, and adapts itself to a
wet, compact soil. In the "flats" of southern Indiana where it is
associated with pin oak, red birch and beech, it is to be preferred for
forest planting to these or any other species that could be grown in the
"flats." It is practically free from all injurious insects. Sweet gum
should be one of the principal species in wet places of the woodlots of
southern Indiana.

This species is one of the best for ornamental planting in all parts of
the State where it is hardy. It is doubtful if it is wise to use it in
the northern part of the State. Several trees in the northern part of
the State are known to be quite hardy, but there are reports that it
sometimes winter-kills. It can also be recommended for roadside and
street planting.

[Illustration: Plate 71.

PLATANUS OCCIDENTALIS Linnæus. Sycamore. (× 1/2.)]




=PLATANÀCEAE.= The Plane Tree Family.


=PLÁTANUS.= The Plane Tree.

Platanus occidentàlis Linnæus. Sycamore. Plate 71. The largest tree of
the State; bark thin, smooth, on age separating into thin plates and
exfoliating, base of the trunks of very old trees somewhat roughened or
fissured, gray to grayish-green, splotched with white; twigs at first
covered with a scurvy pubescence, becoming at maturity glabrous except a
ring at the node about the leaf-scar, gray or light brown, and zigzag;
leaves alternate, long-petioled, nearly orbicular in outline, the blades
somewhat deltoid, blades large, variable in size and shape, average
blades 9-17 cm. long, frequently much larger on vigorous shoots,
generally with 3-5 main lobes, sometimes the lobes are indistinct and
the leaves appear only irregularly toothed, margins toothed, rarely
entire between the lobes, truncate or cordate at the base, acute or
acuminate at the apex; one form has been noted with leaves obovate,
scarcely lobed and with a wedge-shaped base; leaves covered on both
sides at first with a dense tomentum, becoming at maturity glabrous
above--rarely tardily pubescent, nearly glabrous beneath, except on the
veins and in the axils, petioles remaining pubescent; flowers appear in
May with the leaves in heads on long woolly peduncles; fruit a globose
head of many seeds, 2-3.5 cm. in diameter, maturing late in the year;
the seed are scattered by the wind during the winter months; wood heavy,
hard, weak, close-grained, difficult to split and work, takes a high
polish; when used as a container it does not communicate an objectional
taste or odor to contents.

=Distribution.=--Maine, Ontario to Nebraska, south to the Gulf States
and west to Texas. Found in all parts of Indiana, although there are no
records for the extreme northwestern counties. It is a tree of a low
ground habitat, and is found principally in low ground along streams,
about lakes, and ponds. In such habitats it is a frequent tree in all
parts, except in the "flats" of the southern counties. In some places it
is a common to a very common tree, especially along the upper courses of
White River.

=Remarks.=--In this State this species is always called the sycamore
tree. It is the largest tree of the State, and the largest deciduous
tree of the United States. Indiana has the distinction of having the
largest living sycamore in the United States. It is located near
Worthington, Indiana, and "in 1915, measured 43 feet and 3 inches in
circumference at five feet above the ground." See frontispiece. The
sycamore grew to great diameters in all parts of the State. It was
commonly hollow, because it is believed the tree in early life is
usually more or less injured by floating ice and debris which starts
inner decay. Hollow sycamore logs were commonly used by the pioneers in
which to smoke their meat, and sections of hollow logs about 12 dm. (4
feet) long were used to store grain in, and were known as "gums."

The value of sycamore lumber has been very much underestimated. It has
many uses such as butcher blocks, interior finish, furniture, piling,
tobacco boxes, veneer berry boxes, handles, wooden ware, etc. Indiana
has led in the production of sycamore lumber for years.

The sycamore is well adapted for shade, ornamental and forestry
purposes. It transplants easily, grows rapidly, stands pruning well and
is comparatively free from injurious insects. It grows straight, tall
and usually with a rather narrow crown. It prefers a moist soil, but
adapts itself to dry situations. For planting overflow lands, or on the
banks of streams it is one of the best species we have. It is also one
of the best species for roadside tree planting, because it is deep
rooted, grows tall, and does not produce a dense shade.




=MALÀCEAE.=[51] The Apple Family.


The trees of this family that occur in our area have simple, alternate
leaves; perfect, regular flowers, 5-merous calyx and corolla; fruit a
more or less fleshy pome.

  Flowers in racemes, cavities of mature fruit twice as many
      as the styles, seeds less than 4 mm. (1/8 inch) long  2 Amelanchier.

  Flowers in cymes or corymbs, cavities of mature fruit as
      many as the styles, seeds more than 4 mm. (1/8 inch)
      long.

    Fruit green, mature carpels papery                      1 Malus.

    Fruit red, orange, blue-black or yellow, mature carpels
        bony                                                3 Cratægus.


=I. MÀLUS.= The Apples.

_Malus angustifolia_ has been reported from the State, but it is a
species of more southern range. Both _Malus ioensis_ and _Malus
lancifolia_ may easily be mistaken for this species.

  Leaves and petioles glabrous or only slightly pubescent;
      calyx tube and outside of calyx lobes glabrous or only
      slightly pubescent.

    Leaves distinctly lobed, at least those of vigorous
        shoots; petioles pubescent above                  1 M. glaucescens.

    Leaves serrate, not lobed; petioles glabrous          2 M. lancifolia.

  Leaves (at least the lower surfaces) and petioles
      densely tomentose; calyx lobes densely tomentose
      on both sides                                       3 M. ioensis.

=1. Malus glaucéscens= Rehder. American Crab Apple (_M. fragrans_
Rehder). Plate 72. Bark reddish, fissured and scaly; leaves on glandless
petioles, petioles usually 2-4 cm. (3/4-1-1/2 inches) long, leaves
narrow ovate to almost triangular, those on the lateral branchlets of
the ovate type, those of the terminal branchlets and vigorous shoots of
the triangular type, 3-8 cm. (1-1/2-3 inches) long, acute at the apex,
mostly rounded or somewhat cordate at the base, sometimes tapering,
those of the triangular type usually truncate, margin of the ovate type
of leaves more or less sharply serrate, the basal third of the leaf with
shallow teeth or entire, margins of the triangular type more deeply
serrate to almost lobed, hairy above and below when they expand,
becoming smooth both above and below, sometimes a few hairs are found on
the veins beneath at maturity, bright green above, paler beneath;
flowers appear in May when the leaves are about half grown, usually 5 or
6 in a cluster, white or rose-color, very fragrant, 3-4 cm. (1-1/2-2
inches) broad when fully expanded; calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate,
tomentose on the inside, glabrous outside; fruit depressed-globose,
without angles, yellow-green, 2-4.5 cm. (3/4-2 inches) thick, 2-2.5 cm.
(3/4-1 inch) long, very fragrant and covered with a waxy bloom.

=Distribution.=--Central New York, lower peninsula Michigan, western New
Jersey to northern Alabama and Missouri. Found in all parts of Indiana.
No doubt in the original forests it was rare, but the removal of the
large trees has been favorable to its growth until today it is somewhat
frequent in moist open woods, along streams and neglected fences. It is
most frequent among the hills in southern Indiana, and in all its
distribution it is usually found in clumps.

In our area it is a small tree about 10-20 cm. (4-8 inches) in diameter
and 4-6 m. (12-18 feet) high, with a spreading crown. An exceptionally
large tree is located on the south bank of Round Lake in Whitley County
which measures 1.3 m. (51 inches) in circumference at one meter (3 feet)
above the ground where the first branch appears.

Specimens which were collected by the person whose name follows the
county have been seen by the writer from the following counties of
Indiana: Allen (Deam) 1919; Brown (Deam) 1911; Clark (Deam) 1913;
Daviess (Deam) 1910; Decatur (Deam) 1911; Delaware (Deam) 1911; Floyd
(Very) 1896; Fountain (Deam) 1919; Hamilton (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam) 1913;
Kosciusko (Deam) 1910; Laporte (Deam) 1911; Morgan (Deam) 1910; Noble
(Deam) 1919; Owen (Deam) 1911; Posey (Deam) 1911; Randolph (Deam) 1916,
1919; Steuben (Deam) 1905; Warren (Deam) 1911; Wayne (Deam) 1919; Wells
(E. B. Williamson) 1896, (Deam) 1898, 1907, 1916, 1919.

[Illustration: Plate 72.

MALUS GLAUCESCENS Rehder. American Crab Apple. (× 1/2.)]

=2. Malus lancifòlia= Rehder. Narrow-leaved Crab Apple. (_M.
coronaria_ of manuals, in part.) Plate 73. Leaves ovate, oblong to
oblong-lanceolate, 1.5-3 cm. (1/2-1-1/4 inches) wide, 3.5-8 cm. (1-1/2-3
inches) long, acute or shortly acuminate at the apex; rounded or broadly
cuneate at the base, finely serrate often doubly serrate, slightly
tomentose when young, becoming entirely glabrous; bright yellow-green on
both sides. Flowers 3-3.5 cm. broad, 3-6 in a cluster, pedicels slender,
glabrous. Calyx lobes oblong, lanceolate, glabrous outside, slightly
villous inside, fruit subglobose, 2-3 cm. (3/4-1-1/3 inches) in
diameter, green.

=Distribution.=--Pennsylvania to the mountains of North Carolina, west
to Indiana and south to Missouri.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties of Indiana: Allen
(Deam) 1919; Daviess (Deam) 1919; Delaware (Deam) 1911; Dubois (Deam)
1919; Fountain (Deam) 1919; Henry (Deam) 1917, 1919; Jay (Deam) 1919;
Jennings (Deam); Knox (Deam) 1918, 1919; Noble (Deam) 1919; Posey (Deam)
1919; Spencer (Deam) 1919; Starke (Deam) 1911; Union (Deam) 1919;
Vermillion (Deam) 1911.

=3. Malus ioénsis= (Wood) Britton. Western Crab Apple. Iowa Crab Apple.
Plate 74. Leaves oblong to ovate-oblong, 4-10 cm. (1-1/2-4 inches) long,
2-8 cm. (3/4-3-1/4 inches), wide, obtuse or acute at the apex, rounded
or broadly cuneate at the base, dentate-crenate or doubly so, slightly
pubescent above, becoming glabrous, dark green, slightly rugose above,
densely white-tomentose below, remaining so at least along the veins;
petioles 1.5-4 cm. (1/2-1-1/2 inches) long, densely white-tomentose;
corymbs 2-5 flowered, pedicels pubescent; calyx densely white-tomentose,
calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate, densely tomentose on both sides;
flowers similar to those of _Malus coronaria_; fruit globose, without
angles, green, 2-3.5 cm. (3/4-1-1/2 inches) thick, 2-3 cm. (3/4-1-1/4
inches) long.

=Distribution.=--Indiana, central Kentucky, Louisiana, Wisconsin,
southern Minnesota, eastern Kansas and Texas. A tree in habit, similar
to _Malus glaucescens_.

Specimens have been seen from Allen (Deam) 1915; Benton (Deam) 1919;
Cass (Deam) 1916; Daviess (Deam) 1919; Delaware (Deam) 1911; Floyd
(Very) 1896; Huntington (Deam); Jasper (Deam) 1919; Knox (Deam) 1917;
Lake (Deam) 1919; Lagrange (Deam) 1915; Laporte (Deam) 1913, 1919;
Newton (Deam) 1919; Porter (Deam) 1915; Posey (Deam) 1919; Putnam
(Grimes); Sullivan (Deam) 1917, 1919; Tippecanoe (Dorner) 1900, (Deam)
1917; Vigo (Deam) 1917, 1919; Warren (Deam) 1919; White (Deam) 1916;
Whitley (Deam) 1919.

[Illustration: Plate 73.

MALUS LANCIFOLIA Rehder. Narrow-leaved Crab Apple. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 74.

MALUS IOENSIS (Wood) Britton. Western Crab Apple. (× 1/2.)]

=Malus ioensis × lancifolia= n. hyb. Specimens collected by Deam in
Grant County in 1907 and Huntington County in 1919 appear to be this
cross. It would be strange indeed if such closely related species as
these _Malus_ and many _Cratægus_ would not cross.


=2. AMELÁNCHIER.= The Service Berries.

  Leaves densely white tomentose when young,
      becoming green.                                     1 A. canadensis.

  Leaves nearly or quite glabrous                         2 A. lævis.

=1. Amelanchier canadénsis= (Linnæus) Medicus. Juneberry. Service Berry.
Plate 75. Leaves obovate, ovate, oval or oblong, 4-10 cm. (1-1/2-3
inches) long, 2.5-5 cm. (1-2 inches) wide, cordate at base, acute, or
acuminate at apex, sharply and doubly serrate; blades and petioles
densely white tomentose when young, persisting particularly on petioles
with age, green or yellowish green, not unfolded at flowering time;
racemes short, dense, silky tomentose pedicels, 15-25 mm. (1/2-1 inch)
long in fruit; petals linear or linear-oblong 10-14 mm, (3/8-5/8 inch)
long; calyx 2.5-3 mm. broad, campanulate, glabrous or somewhat woolly,
calyx lobes oblong-triangular, obtuse, tomentose 2-3 mm. long, abruptly
reflexed at the base when the petals fall; summit of ovary glabrous;
fruit scanty, maroon-purple, dry and tasteless; flowers in April or May;
fruit ripening June or July.

=Distribution.=--Southern Maine to southern Michigan, Iowa, Kansas,
Missouri and south to Georgia and Louisiana.

Bushy tree or shrub sometimes 10 meters (35 feet) high.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Clark (Deam) 1913;
Clay (Deam) 1913; Crawford (Deam) 1911; Floyd (Deam) 1913; Fountain (L.
A. Williamson) 1908; Jackson (Deam) 1911; Jefferson (Deam) 1918;
Jennings (Deam); Lagrange (Deam) 1915; Tippecanoe (Dorner) 1900; Warren
(Deam) 1911.

=2. Amelanchier laévis= Wiegand. Smooth Juneberry. Service Berry.
(_Amelanchier canadensis_ of Manuals, in part.) Plate 76. Leaves
ovate-oval to ovate-oblong or sometimes obovate or elliptical, 4-6 cm.
(1/2-2-1/4 inches) long, 2.5-4 cm. (1-1-1/2 inches) wide, apex short,
acuminate, base cordate, rounded or sometimes acute, sharply serrate,
glabrous or with a few hairs when young, dark green and slightly
glaucous when mature, one-half or two-third grown at flowering time;
petioles glabrous; racemes many flowered, drooping, glabrous or nearly
so; fruiting pedicels 30-50 mm. (1-1/4-2 inches) long; petals
oblong-linear, 10-18 mm. (3/8-3/4 inch) long; calyx campanulate, 2.75-5
mm. wide, glabrous, sepals triangular, lanceolate, 3-4 mm. long,
abruptly reflexed at base when petals fall; summit of ovary glabrous;
fruit purple to nearly black, glaucous, edible; flowers in April or May;
fruit, June or July.

[Illustration: Plate 75.

AMELANCHIER CANADENSIS (Linnæus) Medicus. June or Service Berry.
(× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 76.

AMELANCHIER LAEVIS Wiegand. Smooth Juneberry or Service Berry.
(× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Newfoundland, northern Michigan, Kansas, Missouri and
south in the mountains to Georgia and Alabama.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Brown (Deam) 1910;
Dubois (Deam) 1912; Grant (Deam) 1916; Jackson (Deam) 1918; Jefferson
(Deam) 1918; Lagrange (Deam) 1915; Lake (Deam) 1911; Laporte (Deam)
1911, 1913; Lawrence (Deam) 1918; Owen (Deam) 1912; Perry (Deam) 1919;
Porter (Deam) 1911 and (Agnes Chase); Putnam (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam) 1913;
Ripley (Deam) 1915; St. Joseph (Deam) 1916; Steuben (Deam) 1905; Wells
(Deam) 1898.

Trees or shrubs, sometimes 13 meters (45 feet) high. In the mountains of
Vermont the fruit is often abundant, very juicy and sweet, and in much
demand both by man and the birds. The berries on the long racemes ripen
at different times and are perhaps two weeks in maturing, thus
furnishing food for some time.


=3. CRATAÈGUS.= Thorn Apples. Red Haws.

Large shrubs or small trees, most at home in a limestone region. This
genus has been studied a great deal in this country. Much work is still
necessary in Indiana since there are a number of other species that
belong in this range. The "knob country" and southwestern Indiana are
likely to produce the best results.

  A. Leaves not deltoid-cordate; pubescent or glabrous.

    I. Leaves broadest at the middle or apex, cuneate.

      a. Leaves broadest towards the apex.

        Leaves not impressed-veined above, shining        I. Crus-galli.
                                              1 C. Crus-galli.

        Leaves impressed-veined above, dull.             II. Punctatæ.

          Fruit glabrous; calyx lobes entire.

            Fruit ellipsoidal; nutlets usually
                3 or 4.

              Leaves bright yellow-green,
                slightly impressed above;
                fruit ellipsoidal.            2 C. cuneiformis.

              Leaves dull gray-green, strongly
                impressed-veined; fruit short
                ellipsoidal.                  3 C. punctata.
            Fruit globose.                    4 C. Margaretta.

          Fruit villous; calyx lobes
              glandular-serrate.              5 C. collina.

      b. Leaves broadest at the middle.

        Leaves impressed-veined; nutlets deeply
            pitted on inner face.                       III. Macracanthæ.

          Leaves dark green, glabrous and shining above, coriaceous.

            Fruit sometimes 16 mm. (2/3 inch)
              thick; stamens usually 10;
              leaves and anthers large.       6 C. succulenta.

            Fruit sometimes 12 mm. (1/2 inch)
              thick; stamens 15-20; leaves
              and anthers small.              7 C. neo-fluvialis.

          Leaves gray-green, pubescent and
            dull above, subcoriaceous.        8 C. Calpodendron.

      Leaves not impressed-veined; nutlets without pits.

              Calyx glandular margined, fruit more than
                8 mm. (1/8 inch) thick; leaves not
                trilobate.                               IV. Rotundifoliæ.
                                              9 C. chrysocarpa.

              Calyx lobes not glandular margined; fruit 4-8 mm.
                (1/16-1/8 inch thick); leaves often trilobate
                towards the apex.                         V. Virides.

                Fruit bright red, glaucous,
                  4-6 mm. (1/6-1/4 inch) thick;
                  leaves serrate.            10 C. viridis.

                Fruit dull dark red, 6-8 mm.
                    (1/4-1/3 inch) thick;
                    leaves coarsely serrate. 11 C. nitida.

  II. Leaves broadest at the base.

    a. Leaves 1.5-6 cm. (1/2-2-1/2 inches) long and wide,
       membranaceous; calyx lobes usually entire.

      Leaves yellow-green, often slightly pubescent; fruit soft
          at maturity.                                   VI. Tenuifoliæ.

        Fruit ellipsoidal, ovoid or
            pyriform.                        12 C. macrosperma.

        Fruit compressed, globose or
            subglobose.                      13 C. basilica.

      Leaves blue-green, glabrous; fruit hard at
          maturity.                                     VII. Pruinosæ.

        Leaves elliptic-ovate.               14 C. Jesupi.

          Leaves usually cordate.

            Fruit conspicuously angled,
                strongly pruinose.           15 C. rugosa.

            Fruit without conspicuous
              angles, slightly pruinose.     16 C. filipes.

          Leaves usually cuneate.

            Leaves deltoid.                  17 C. Gattingeri.

            Leaves ovate.                    18 C. pruinosa.

    b. Leaves 3-10 cm. (1-4 inches) long and wide;
            calyx lobes usually serrate.               VIII. Coccineæ.

          Mature leaves usually glabrous above; young
              foliage bronze-green; anthers pink.

            Corymbs and fruit glabrous.      19 C. coccinioides.

            Corymbs and fruit pubescent or
                tomentose.                   20 C. coccinea.

          Mature leaves tomentose above;
              young foliage yellow-green;
              anthers yellow.                21 C. mollis.

  B. Leaves conspicuously deltoid-cordate.               IX. Cordatæ.
                                             22 C. Phænopyrum.

=1. Crataegus Crus-gálli= Linnæus. Cock-spur Thorn. Newcastle Thorn.
Plate 77. Bark dark gray, scaly; spines many, strong, straight, 3-18 cm.
(1-7 inches) long; leaves obovate to elliptical, 2-10 cm. (3/4-4 inches)
long, 1-4 cm. (1/4-1-1/2 inches) wide, sharply serrate, except towards
the base, acute or rounded at the apex, cuneate, dark green and shining
above, coriaceous, glabrous or occasionally slightly pubescent; petioles
slightly winged above, glandless, 1-2 cm. (3/8-3/4 inch) long; corymbs
glabrous or occasionally pubescent, many flowered; flowers appear in May
or June, about 1.5 cm. (2/3 inch) wide; stamens 10-20; anthers usually
pink; calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate, entire; styles and nutlets
usually 2; fruit ripens in October, ellipsoidal-ovoid to subglobose,
about 1 cm. (3/8 inch) thick, greenish to red; flesh hard and dry,
rather thin.

=Distribution.=--Northern New York to Ontario, eastern Kansas and south
through western Connecticut to Georgia and Texas. Introduced near
Montreal, about Lake Champlain and Nantucket Island. Well distributed in
Indiana (but apparently more common in the southern part of the State).

A small tree, sometimes 10 m. (35 feet) high, with spreading branches
and a broad crown; but often a large shrub. This is a variable species
and has received many names.

I have seen specimens from the following counties: Allen (Deam);
Crawford (Deam); Dearborn (Deam); Decatur (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Delaware
(Deam); Dubois (Deam); Franklin (Deam); Gibson (Schneck), (Deam); Grant
(Deam); Hancock (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Jackson (Deam); Knox (Schneck);
Lawrence (Deam); Marion (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Posey (Deam); Owen
(Grimes); Randolph (Deam); Scott (Deam); Tippecanoe (Deam); Vermillion
(Deam); Vigo (Blatchley); Washington (Deam); Wells (Deam).

=2. Crataegus cuneifórmis= (Marshall) Eggleston. (_C. pausiaca_ Ashe).
Marshall's Thorn. Plate 78. Bark dark brown, scaly; spines numerous,
2-18 cm. (3/4-7 inches) long; leaves oblanceolate-obovate, acute at the
apex, cuneate at the base, serrate or doubly serrate 3-6 cm. (1/2-1-1/2
inches) wide, dark vivid yellow-green, glabrous and impressed veined
above when mature, subcoriaceous; petioles 1-2 cm. (3/8-3/4 inch) long,
slightly winged above; corymbs usually slightly pubescent, many
flowered; flowers appear in May, 1.2-1.5 cm. (1/2-2/3 inch) wide; calyx
lobes lanceolate-acuminate, entire; stamens, 10-15; anthers dark pink;
styles and nutlets 2-4; fruit ripens in October, ellipsoidal-pyriform,
scarlet or dark red, about 8 mm. (3/8 inch) thick, flesh hard, thick.

=Distribution.=--Western New York and Pennsylvania to southwestern
Virginia, west to central Illinois.

[Illustration: Plate 77.

CRATAEGUS CRUS-GALLI Linnæus. Cock-spur Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 78.

CRATAEGUS CUNEIFORMIS (Marshall) Eggleston. Marshall's Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

A small tree sometimes 8 m. (25 feet) high, with spreading branches,
forming a flat or round crown. This species is intermediate between
_Crus-galli_ and _punctata_ and has been found as yet only in a region
where both these species are known.

I have seen specimens from the following counties: Clark (Deam); Floyd
(Deam); Gibson (Schneck), (Deam); Hamilton (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Knox
(Schneck); Marion (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Posey (Deam); Vigo (Blatchley);
Wells (Deam).

=3. Crataegus punctàta= Jacquin. Large-fruited Thorn. Dotted Haw. Plate
79. Bark grayish-brown, scaly; leaves light grey, 2-5 cm. (3/4-4 inches)
long, 1-5 cm. (1/4-2 inches) broad, dull gray-green and markedly
impressed-vein above, pubescent, becoming nearly glabrous above when
mature, acute or obtuse at the apex, sharply cuneate at the base,
serrate, doubly serrate or lobed at the apex, subcoriaceous; petioles
1-2 cm. (3/8-3/4 inch) long, slightly winged above; corymbs tomentose or
canescent, many flowered; flowers appear in June, about 2 cm. (5/6 inch)
wide; calyx lobes lanceolate, acuminate, entire; stamens about 20;
anthers white or pink; styles and nutlets usually 3 or 4; fruit ripens
in October or November, green, yellow or red, short-ellipsoidal, 1.2-2.5
cm. (1/2-1 inch) thick, flesh hard, thick; calyx lobes spreading.

=Distribution.=--Quebec to Pennsylvania, southeastern Minnesota, Iowa,
Kentucky and south to the high Alleghenies. Well distributed over
Indiana. A small tree, sometimes 10 m. (35 feet) high, with distinctly
horizontal branches and a broad, flat crown.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Allen (Deam);
Bartholomew (Deam); Dearborn (Deam); Fulton (Deam); Gibson (Deam); Grant
(Deam); Hamilton (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Hendricks (Deam); Howard (Deam);
Jennings (Deam); Johnson (Deam); Marion (Deam); Noble (Deam); Putnam
(Grimes); Vermillion (Deam); Vigo (Blatchley); Wayne (Deam); Wells
(Deam).

=4. Crataegus Margarètta= Ashe. Judge Brown's Thorn. Mrs. Ashe's Thorn.
Plate 80. Bark dark grayish-brown; spines curved, 2-4 cm. (3/4-1-1/2
inches) long; leaves oblong-obovate or ovate, sometimes broadly so, 2-6
cm. (3/4-2-1/2 inches) long, 2-4 cm. (3/4-1-1/2 inches) wide, obtuse or
acute at the apex, cuneate or rounded at the base, serrate or doubly
serrate with 2 or 3 pairs of acute or obtuse lobes towards the apex,
glabrous when mature, dark green above, membranaceous; petioles 1-3 cm.
(3/8-1-1/4 inches) long, slightly winged; corymbs slightly pubescent,
becoming glabrous, 5-12 flowered; flowers appear in May, 1.5-2 cm.
(1/2-5/6 inch) wide; stamens about 20; anthers yellow; styles and
nutlets usually 2; calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate, slightly pubescent
inside; fruit ripens in October, dull rusty green, yellow or red,
compressed-globose, to short ellipsoidal, angular, 8-25 mm. (1/2-2/3
inch) thick, flesh yellow, mealy, hard, thick; calyx lobes reflexed,
deciduous.

[Illustration: Plate 79.

CRATAEGUS PUNCTATA Jacquin. Large-fruited Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 80.

CRATÆGUS MARGARETTA Ashe. Judge Brown's Thorn. Mrs. Ashe's Thorn.
(× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Southern Ontario to central Iowa, western Virginia,
Tennessee and Missouri. Known in Indiana only from the northern part of
the State.

A small tree sometimes 8 m. (25 feet) high, with spreading branches.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Allen (Deam);
Blackford (Deam); Cass (Mrs. Ida Jackson); Delaware (Deam); Elkhart
(Deam); Fulton (Deam); Grant (Deam); Henry (Deam); Huntington (Deam);
Johnson (Deam); Lagrange (Deam); Lawrence (Deam); Noble (Deam); Randolph
(Deam); Steuben (Deam); Tipton (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Wayne (Deam); Wells
(Deam).

=5. Crataegus collìna= Chapman. Chapman's Hill Thorn. Plate 81. Bark
dark gray, scaly; spines numerous, about 3-7 cm. (1-2-1/2 inches) long;
often numerous branched thorns on the trunk 15-20 cm. (6-8 inches) long,
brown; leaves obovate to oblanceolate, 2-6 cm. (3/4-2-1/4 inches) long,
1.5-5 cm. (1/2-2 inches) wide, acute or obtuse at the apex, strongly
cuneate, serrate or doubly serrate with obtuse lobes towards the apex,
subcoriaceous, yellow-green, young leaves somewhat pubescent, becoming
glabrous with age; petioles about 2.5 cm. (1 inch) long, slightly hairy,
somewhat winged; corymbs and calyx pubescent; flowers about 15 mm. (3/4
inch) wide; stamens 10-20, usually 20, anthers usually yellow; styles
and nutlets, 4-5; calyx lobes glandular-ciliate or glandular-serrate;
fruit ripens in October, globose or compressed-globose, red or
orange-red, 9-12 mm. (3/8-1/2 inch) thick; calyx tube somewhat
prominent, the lobes reflexed.

=Distribution.=--Virginia to Georgia, Indiana, Missouri and Mississippi.

Only one station known in Indiana; Deam's No. 12449 from Dearborn
County.

A tree sometimes 8 meters (25 feet) high with spreading branches and a
broad flat crown.

=6. Crataegus succulénta= Schrader. Long-spined Thorn. Plate 82. Bark
gray; spines numerous, strong, 3-10 cm. (1-1/2-4 inches) long,
chestnut-brown; leaves rhombic-ovate to obovate, 3-8 cm. (1-1/4-3-1/4
inches) long, 2.5-6 cm. (1-2-1/2 inches) wide, acute at the apex,
broadly cuneate at the base, serrate or doubly serrate with fine teeth,
often lobed towards the apex, coriaceous, dark shining green above,
pubescent along the veins beneath; petioles 1-2 cm. (3/8-3/4 inch) long,
slightly winged above; corymbs slightly villous, many-flowered; flowers
appear in May, about 2 cm. (3/4 inch) broad; stamens 10-20, usually 10;
anthers pink or occasionally yellow or white, large; styles and nutlets
usually 2 or 3; calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate, glandular-laciniate,
villous; fruit ripens in September, subglobose, 5-15 mm. (1/4-2/3 inch)
thick, dark red, shining, flesh thin, glutinous; nutlet with deep pits
on the inner faces; calyx-lobes villous, reflexed.

[Illustration: Plate 81.

CRATÆGUS COLLINA Chapman. Chapman's Hill Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 82.

CRATÆGUS SUCCULENTA Schrader. Long-spined Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia to Minnesota, Nebraska and south in the
higher Alleghenies to North Carolina and in the Rocky Mountains to
southern Colorado. As yet reported only from northern to central
Indiana.

A small tree sometimes 6 m. (20 feet) high, with ascending branches and
a broad, irregular crown; more often, however, a large shrub.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Allen (Deam); Cass
(Mrs. Ida Jackson); Fulton (Deam); Noble (VanGorder); Putnam (Grimes);
Tippecanoe (Deam); Wells (Deam).

=Horticultural Uses.=--Highly ornamental for parks and hedges because of
the abundant flowers, dark green shining leaves and its dark red shining
fruit.

=7. Crataegus neo-fluviàlis= Ashe. New River Thorn. Plate 83. Bark
grayish; spines numerous, 2.5-8 cm. (1-3 inches) long; leaves
elliptical-ovate to obovate, 2.5-8 cm. (1-3 inches) long, 2-6 cm.
(3/4-2-1/2 inches) wide, acute or obtuse at the apex, cuneate at the
base, sharply and doubly serrate, with obtuse or acute lobes towards the
apex, coriaceous, dark green and shining above, pubescent along the
veins beneath; petioles 1-2 cm. (3/8-3/4 inch) long, slightly
winged-above; corymbs and calyx-tubes glabrous or slightly villous,
many-flowered; flowers appear in May, 1.2-1.6 cm. (1/2-2/3 inch) broad,
stamens 15-20, anthers usually pink, small; styles and nutlets usually 2
or 3; calyx lobes more villous on the inside, lanceolate-acuminate,
glandular-laciniate; fruit ripens in September, globose or short
ellipsoidal, dark red, 4-13 mm. (1/4-1/2 inch) thick, flesh thin,
glutinous, nutlets with deep pits in the inner faces; calyx lobes
reflexed, glabrous or slightly hairy.

=Distribution.=--Western Vermont to eastern Wisconsin, Iowa and south in
the Alleghenies to North Carolina.

A small tree sometimes 8 m. (30 feet) high, with ascending and spreading
branches.

Specimens have been seen from Allen (Deam); Fulton (Deam); Shelby
(Deam); Wells (Deam).

[Illustration: Plate 83.

CRATÆGUS NEO-FLUVIALIS Ashe. New Riverthorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 84.

CRATÆGUS CALPODENDRON (Ehrhart) Medicus. Pear-thorn. (× 1/2.)]

=8. Crataegus Calpodéndron= (Ehrhart) Medicus. Pear-thorn. Pear or Red
Haw. Plate 84. Bark pale gray to dark brown, furrowed; spines
occasional, slender 3-5 cm. (1-1/4-2 inches) long; leaves rhombic-ovate,
4-11 cm. (1-1/2-4-1/2 inches) long, 3-8 cm. (1-1/4-3 inches) wide, acute
or acuminate at the apex, finely and doubly serrate, those on the
vegetative shoots obtuse and more entire than the others, pubescent on
both sides, becoming scabrate above, subcoriaceous, dull green above;
petioles about 2 cm. (3/4 inch) long, wing margined, glandular hairy;
corymbs white-tomentose, many flowered; flowers appear in June, about
1.5 cm. (2/3 inch) broad; stamens about 20; anthers small, pink; styles
and nutlets usually 2 or 3; calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate, glandular
laciniate; fruit ripens in September, pyriform to ellipsoidal,
orange-red or red, 8-10 mm. (1/3 inch) thick, flesh glutinous; nutlets
with deep pits in their inner faces; calyx lobes reflexed.

=Distribution.=--Central New York, northeastern New Jersey to Minnesota
and Missouri and south in the mountains to northern Georgia.

A large shrub or occasionally a tree 6 m. (20 feet) high, with ascending
branches forming a broad crown.

Specimens have been examined from the following counties: Boone (Deam);
Floyd (Deam); Hancock (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Harrison (Deam); Marion
(Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Posey (Deam); Putnam (Grimes); Tippecanoe (Stanley
Coulter); Wells (Deam); White (Deam); Whitley (Deam).

=9. Crataegus chrysocárpa= Ashe. (_Crataegus Dodgei_ Sargent. _Crataegus
rotundifolia_, Borckhausen.) Round-leaved Thorn. Plate 85. Bark dark
red-brown, scaly; spines numerous, chestnut-brown, curved, 2-5 cm. (1-2
inches) long; leaves ovate-orbicular or obovate, 3-6 cm. (1-1/4-2-1/4
inches) long, 2-6 cm. (3/4-2-1/4 inches) wide, acute at the apex,
broadly cuneate at the base, doubly serrate with rather coarse teeth and
with 3 or 4 pairs of acute lobes, subcoriaceous, dark yellow-green and
shining above, slightly pubescent or glabrous; corymbs glabrous or
slightly pubescent; flowers 10-15 mm. (1/2-3/4 inch) wide; stamens 5-10;
anthers light yellow; styles and nutlets usually 3-4; calyx lobes
lanceolate, acuminate, usually entire, but glandular margined; fruit
depressed-globose to short ovoid, about 10 mm. (1/2 inch) thick, flesh
soft; calyx lobes reflexed.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia and New Brunswick to Saskatchewan, south to
Nebraska and Pennsylvania and in the mountains to North Carolina and New
Mexico.

Round topped shrub or tree sometimes 8 meters (25 feet) high.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Delaware and
Lagrange (Deam).

[Illustration: Plate 85.

CRATÆGUS CHRYSOCARPA Ashe. Round-leaved Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 86.

CRATÆGUS VIRIDIS Linnæus. Southern Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

=10. Crataegus víridis= Linnæus. Southern Thorn. Plate 86. Bark gray to
light orange; spines uncommon, 2-5 cm. (3/4-3-1/4 inches) long; leaves
oblong-ovate, 2-8 cm. (3/4-3-1/4 inches) long, 2-5 cm. (1/2-2 inches)
wide, acute, acuminate or even obtuse at the apex, serrate or doubly
serrate, often with acute or obtuse lobes towards the apex, dark green,
shining and slightly impressed veined above, sometimes pubescent along
the veins beneath; petioles 1-2 cm. (3/8-3/4 inch) long, slightly
winged above; corymbs glabrous, many flowered; flowers appear in May,
1-1.5 cm. (1/2-2/3 inch) broad; stamens about 20; anthers usually
yellow, sometimes pink; styles and nutlets 4 or 5; calyx lobes
lanceolate-acuminate, entire, slightly pubescent inside; fruit ripens in
October, globose or compressed-globose, bright red or orange, glaucous,
4-6 mm. (1/4 inch) thick, flesh thin, hard, edible.

=Distribution.=--Moist, alluvial soil along streams and lakes,
southeastern Virginia to northern Florida and southwestern Indiana to
eastern Kansas and Texas.

A tree from 6-11 m. (20-35 feet) high, with ascending branches and a
broad crown.

Specimens have been examined from the following counties: Dubois (Deam);
Gibson (Schneck), (Deam); Knox (Schneck); Posey (Deam).

=11. Crataegus nítida= (Engelmann) Sargent. Shining Thorn. Plate 87.
Bark dark and scaly; spines occasional, 3-5 cm. (1-2 inches) long;
leaves oblong-ovate to oval, 3-8 cm. (1-1/4-3 inches) long, 2-6 cm.
(3/4-2-1/4 inches) wide, acute at the apex, cuneate at the base,
coarsely serrate or twice serrate with acute lobes towards the apex,
dark green and shining above, glabrous; petioles 1-2 cm. (3/8-3/4 inch)
long, slightly winged above, slightly villous when young; corymbs
glabrous, many-flowered; flowers appear in May, 1.2-2 cm. (1/2-3/4 inch)
broad; stamens about 20; anthers light yellow; styles and nutlets 3-5;
calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate, entire; fruit ripens in October,
globose to short-ellipsoidal, dark dull red, 6-9 mm. (1/4-1/2 inch)
thick; flesh yellow, mealy, hard.

=Distribution.=--River bottoms southwestern Indiana to southern
Illinois. A tree sometimes 9 m. (30 feet) high, with ascending and
spreading branches and a broad crown.

Specimens have been seen from Gibson (Schneck); Posey (Deam).

[Illustration: Plate 87.

CRATÆGUS NITIDA (Engelmann) Sargent. Shining Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 88.

CRATÆGUS MACROSPERMA Ashe. Variable Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

=12. Crataegus macrospérma= Ashe. Variable Thorn. Plate 88. Bark brown,
scaly; spines numerous, stout, curved, 2-7 cm. (3/4-2-3/4 inches) long;
leaves broadly elliptical-ovate to broadly ovate, 2-7 cm. (3/4-2-3/4
inches) long and wide, acute at the apex, rounded, truncate or rarely
cordate at the base, serrate or doubly serrate, slightly villous,
becoming glabrate, dark yellow-green above, membranaceous; petioles
slender, 2-3 cm. (1/2-1-1/4 inches) long, slightly winged above; corymbs
glabrous or slightly villous, many-flowered; flowers appear in May,
1.5-2 cm. (1/2-3/4 inch) broad; stamens 5-20, usually 5-10; styles and
nutlets usually 3 or 4; calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate, entire; fruit
ripens in August or September, ellipsoidal or pyriform, scarlet to
crimson, often glaucous, 1-1.8 cm. (1/3-3/4 inch) thick, flesh
succulent, edible; calyx lobes persistent, erect or spreading.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia and Maine to southeastern Minnesota and
south in the mountains to North Carolina and Tennessee.

Usually a large shrub but occasionally a small tree, sometimes 8 m. (25
feet) high, with ascending branches.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Allen (Deam);
Bartholomew (Deam); Clark (Deam); Decatur (Deam); Fulton (Deam); Hancock
(Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Madison (Deam); Porter (Deam); Randolph (Deam);
Shelby (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Washington (Deam); Wells (Deam); Whitley
(Deam).

=Crataegus macrosperma= Ashe. var. =matura= (Sargent) Eggleston. Lobes
of the leaves acuminate, often recurved; fruit ripens early.

=Distribution.=--Known in Indiana only from Deam's specimen No. 14187
from Wells County.

=13. Crataegus basilìca= Beadle. (_Crataegus alnorum_ Sargent.
_Crataegus Edsoni_ Sargent). Edson's Thorn. Plate 89. Bark brown, scaly;
spines 2.5-4 cm. (1-1-1/2 inches) long, stout, curved; leaves ovate, 3-7
cm. (1-1/4-2-3/4 inches) long, acute at the apex, broadly cuneate or
truncate at base, serrate or doubly serrate with acute lobes, dull dark
yellow-green above, paler beneath; corymbs glabrous, many flowered;
flowers 15-20 mm. (5/8-7/8 inch) broad; stamens about 20; anthers pink;
styles and nutlets 3-5; fruit subglobose, slightly angular, dark
cherry-red, 12-15 mm. (1/2-5/8 inch) thick, flesh succulent; calyx lobes
erect or spreading.

=Distribution.=--New England to southern Michigan, northern Indiana and
Pennsylvania to mountains of North Carolina and Tennessee.

A broad shrub or small tree sometimes 4.5 meters (15 feet) high,
branches ascending.

Specimens examined: Wells (Deam).

[Illustration: Plate 89.

CRATÆGUS BASILICA Beadle. Edson's Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 90.

CRATÆGUS JESUPI Sargent. Jesup's Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

=14. Crataegus Jésupi= Sargent. Jesup's Thorn. Twin Mountain Thorn.
Plate 90. Bark grayish-brown; spines stout, straight 2-4 cm. (3/4-1-1/2
inches) long; leaves elliptical-ovate, 3.5-7 cm. (1-1/2-3 inches) long,
2-5.5 cm. (1-2 inches) wide, acute or acuminate at the apex, broadly
cuneate to truncate-cordate, serrate or doubly serrate, with 4 or 5
pairs of acute lobes, yellow-green above, paler beneath, glabrous;
petioles slender, 2-3.5 cm. (3/4-1-1/2 inches) long, slightly winged
above; corymbs glabrous, many-flowered; flowers appear in May, about 2
cm. (5/6 inch) broad; stamens about 10; anthers dark red; styles and
nutlets usually 3 or 4; calyx lobes entire; fruit ripens in October,
short-ellipsoidal to pyriform, dark red, slightly angled, lacking bloom
when mature, about 1 cm. (3/8 inch) thick, flesh yellow, firm; calyx
lobes mostly deciduous.

=Distribution.=--Western Vermont, to southwestern Wisconsin and south to
Pennsylvania and Owen County, Indiana.

A shrubby tree, sometimes 6 m. (20 feet) high, with ascending branches
and a round crown.

Specimens examined: Owen (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam).

=15. Crataegus rugòsa= Ashe. (_Crataegus deltoides_ Ashe). Fretz's
Thorn. Plate 91. Spines numerous, 3-6 cm. (1-1/4-2-1/2 inches) long,
stout curved; leaves broadly ovate, 3-7 cm. (1-2-3/4 inches) long and
broad, acute or acuminate at the apex, cordate or truncate at the base,
serrate or twice serrate with 4-6 pairs of broad acuminate lobes,
glabrous, membranaceous; petioles 1-3 cm. (3/8-1-1/4 inches) long,
glabrous; corymbs many-flowered, glabrous; flowers appear in May, about
2 cm. (5/6 inch) broad; stamens 10-20; anthers pink; styles and nutlets
usually 4 or 5; calyx lobes deltoid-acuminate, entire or slightly
serrate at the base; fruit ripens in October, depressed-globose, bright
red, angular, glabrous, waxy, 1-1.5 cm. (1/2-2/3 inch) thick, flesh
yellow, somewhat succulent; calyx lobes persistent, spreading, the tube
rather prominent.

=Distribution.=--Southwestern New England to southern Indiana and the
mountains of North Carolina.

A shrub or tree sometimes 6 m. (20 feet) high, with ascending branches
and an irregular crown.

Specimens examined: Allen (Deam); Decatur (Deam); Grant (Deam); Jennings
(Deam); Owen (Deam); Perry (Deam); Wells (Deam).

=16. Crataegus fílipes= Ashe. Miss Beckwith's Thorn. (_Crataegus
silvicola_ var. _Beckwithae_ (Sargent) Eggleston). Plate 92. Spines
numerous, curved, chestnut-brown, 2.5 to 6 cm. (1-2-1/2 inches) long;
bark slightly scaly; leaves 2-7 cm. (3/4-2-3/4 inches) long, 2-6 cm.
(3/4-2-1/2 inches) wide; leaves ovate, acute or acuminate at apex,
rounded, truncate or on vegetative shoots cordate at base, serrate or
doubly serrate, lower pair of acuminate lobes often deeply cut,
membranaceous, glabrous; corymbs glabrous; flowers about 2 cm. (3/4
inch) broad; stamens about 10; anthers pink; styles and nutlets 3-5;
fruit globose or compressed-globose, cherry-red, 8-10 mm. (1/3 inch)
thick, ripens in October.

[Illustration: Plate 91.

CRATÆGUS RUGOSA Ashe. Fretz's Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 92.

CRATÆGUS FILIPES Ashe. Miss Beckwith's Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Western New England to central Michigan and south to
Pennsylvania and southern Indiana.

A shrub or tree sometimes 9 meters (30 feet) high, with irregular
ascending branches.

Specimens have been seen from Perry County, Deam's No. 27104.

=17. Crataegus Gattíngeri= Ashe. (_Crataegus coccinea_ var. _oligandra_
Torrey and Gray). Dr. Clapp's Thorn. Gattinger's Thorn. Plate 93. Spines
numerous, 2.5-6 cm. (1-2 inches) long; leaves narrowly ovate to deltoid,
2.5-6 cm. (1-2-1/2 inches) long, 2-5 cm. (3/4-2 inches) wide, acuminate
at the apex, broadly cuneate or rounded at the base, serrate or doubly
serrate, lobed towards the apex, membranaceous, glabrous, dark green
above; petioles glabrous, 2-3 cm. (3/4-1-1/4 inches) long; corymbs
glabrous, many-flowered; flowers appear in May, about 2 cm. (3/4 inch)
broad; stamens 10-20; anthers small, pink; styles and nutlets usually 3
or 4; fruit ripens in October, globose, angular, red, slightly waxy,
0.8-1.2 cm. (1/3-1/2 inch) thick, flesh hard; calyx tube prominent, the
lobes triangular, spreading.

=Distribution.=--Southern Pennsylvania and southern Indiana to West
Virginia and central Tennessee.

Shrub or small tree sometimes 4.5 m. (15 feet) high, with ascending,
irregular branches.

Specimens seen from: Floyd (Dr. Clapp, before 1840); Knox (Schneck);
Perry (Deam); Steuben (Deam); Wells (Deam).

=18. Crataegus pruinòsa= (Wendland) K. Koch. Waxy-fruited Thorn. Plate
94. Bark dark brown; spines numerous, slender, 3-6 cm. (1-1/4-2-1/2
inches) long; leaves elliptic-ovate to broadly ovate, 2.5-6 cm. (1-2-1/2
inches) long and wide, acute or acuminate at the apex, abruptly cuneate,
rounded or occasionally cordate at the base, serrate or doubly serrate
with 3 or 4 pairs of broad acute lobes towards the apex, blue-green,
glabrous, membranaceous; petioles 2 or 3 cm. (3/4-1-1/4 inches) long,
glabrous; corymbs glabrous, many-flowered; flowers appear in May, about
2 cm. (5/6 inch) broad; stamens 10-20; anthers pink or sometimes yellow
or white; styles and nutlets 4 or 5; calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate,
entire, slightly serrate at the base; fruit ripens in October,
depressed-globose to short-ellipsoidal, strongly angled, waxy, apple
green, becoming scarlet or purple, 1.2-1.5 cm. (1/2-2/3 inch), thick,
firm, yellow, sweet; calyx tube prominent, the lobes spreading,
persistent.

=Distribution.=--Rocky, open woods, western New England to Michigan and
south to North Carolina and Missouri. Well distributed in Indiana.

[Illustration: Plate 93.

CRATÆGUS GATTINGERI Ashe. Dr. Gattinger's Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 94.

CRATÆGUS PRUINOSA (Wendland) K. Koch. Waxy-fruited Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

A small shrubby tree sometimes 6 m. (20 feet) high, with irregular
branches and crown.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Allen (Deam);
Clark (Deam); Decatur (Deam); Delaware (Deam); Gibson (Deam); Hamilton
(Deam); Hancock (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Lagrange (Deam); Madison (Deam);
Marion (Deam); Monroe (Deam); Porter (Deam); Putnam (Grimes); Randolph
(Deam); Steuben (Deam); Sullivan (Deam); Tipton (Deam); Vermillion
(Deam); Warren (Deam); Wayne (Deam); Wells (Deam).

=19. Crataegus coccinioìdes= Ashe. Eggert's Thorn. (_Crataegus Eggertii_
Britton). Plate 95. Bark grayish-brown, scaly; spines curved, 2-6 cm.
(3/4-2-1/2 inches) long; leaves broadly ovate, 4-9 cm. (1-1/2-3-1/2
inches) long, 3.5-8 cm. (1-3/4-3 inches) wide, acute at the apex,
rounded or truncate at the base, doubly serrate with several pairs of
broad, acute lobes, dark green above, paler and slightly tomentose along
the veins beneath, membranaceous; petioles 2 to 3 cm. (3/4-1-1/4 inches)
long, slightly pubescent; corymbs glabrous, 5-12 flowered; flowers
appear in May, about 2 cm. (5/6 inch) broad; stamens about 20; anthers
pink; styles and nutlets usually 4 or 5; calyx lobes ovate, acute,
glandular-serrate; fruit ripens in September, subglobose, obtusely
angled, 1.5-2 cm. (3/4-1 inch) thick, flesh reddish, subacid, edible;
calyx tube prominent, the lobes spreading.

=Distribution.=--Montreal Island to Rhode Island and west to eastern
Kansas and Missouri.

A small tree sometimes 6 m. (20 feet) high, with ascending and spreading
branches and a broad, round-topped crown.

Specimens have been seen from: Floyd (Dr. Clapp, before 1840), (Deam);
Gibson (Schneck); Marion (Deam); Martin (Deam); Vigo (Blatchley);
Whitley (Deam).

=20. Crataegus coccínea= Linnæus. Scarlet Thorn. Red Haw. (_Crataegus
pedicillata_ Sargent). Plate 96. Bark light gray, spines stout, curved,
2-6 cm. (3/4-2 inches) long; leaves broadly ovate, 3-10 cm. (1-1/4-4
inches) long, 3-9 cm. (1-1/4-3-1/2 inches) wide, acute or acuminate at
the apex, broadly cuneate to truncate at the base, serrate, doubly
serrate or lobed, slightly pubescent, becoming scabrous above, nearly
glabrous beneath, membranaceous; corymbs glabrous or sometimes slightly
villous, many-flowered; flowers appear in May, 1.5-2 cm. (2/3-5/6 inch)
broad; stamens 10-20; anthers pink; styles and nutlets 3-5; fruit ripens
in September, pyriform to short ellipsoidal, scarlet or red, glabrous or
slightly pubescent, 1.5-2 cm. (3/4-5/6 inch) thick, flesh thick, dry and
mealy; calyx lobes lanceolate-acuminate, glandular-serrate, erect or
spreading, rather persistent.

[Illustration: Plate 95.

CRATÆGUS COCCINOIDES Ashe. Eggert's Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 96.

CRATÆGUS COCCINEA Linnæus. Scarlet Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Connecticut to Ontario, Illinois, Delaware and
Pennsylvania.

A small tree sometimes 8 m. (25 feet) high, with ascending and spreading
branches and a broad, round-topped crown.

Specimens have been seen from the following counties: Floyd (Deam); Knox
(Deam); Noble (VanGorder); Steuben (Deam); White (Deam).

=Horticultural Uses.=--This fine tree has been in the gardener's hands
several centuries. There are specimens in the Kew Gardens, England, more
than two hundred years old.

=20a. Crataegus coccinea= var. =Ellwangeriàna=, n. nom. (_Crataegus
pedicillata_ var. _Ellwangeriana_ (Sargent) Eggleston). Corymbs densely
villous; fruit slightly villous.

=Distribution.=--Known in Indiana from Deam's specimen No. 27355 from
Warren County.

=21. Crataegus móllis= (Torrey and Gray) Scheele. Red-fruited or Downy
Thorn. Red Haw. Plate 97. Bark grayish-brown, fissured and scaly; spines
curved, 3-5 cm. (1-2 inches) long; leaves broadly ovate, acute at the
apex, cordate to truncate at the base, serrate or twice serrate with
narrow acute lobes, 4-13 cm. (1-1/2-5 inches) long, 4-10 cm. (1-1/2-4
inches) wide, slightly rugose, densely tomentose beneath, tomentose
above, becoming scabrous, membranaceous; petioles 2-4 cm. (3/4-1-1/2
inches) long, tomentose; corymbs tomentose, many-flowered; flowers
appear in May, about 2.5 cm. (1 inch) broad; stamens about 20; anthers
light yellow; styles and nutlets 4 or 5; fruit ripens in September,
short-ellipsoidal to subglobose, scarlet, 1.5-2.5 cm. (1/2-1 inch)
thick, flesh thick, yellow, edible; calyx lobes glandular-serrate,
swollen, erect or spreading, deciduous.

=Distribution.=--Southern Ontario to South Dakota, south to central
Tennessee and Arkansas. This thorn is well distributed over Indiana.

A small tree often 13 m. (40 feet) high, with ascending and spreading
branches, forming a broad, round-topped crown.

Specimens have been examined from the following counties: Allen (Deam);
Cass (Mrs. Ida Jackson); Dearborn (Deam); Decatur (Deam); Delaware
(Deam); Floyd (Deam); Gibson (Schneck), (Deam); Hancock (Deam);
Hendricks (Deam); Henry (Deam); Jackson (Deam); Knox (Schneck), (Deam);
Madison (Deam); Marion (Mrs. Chas. C. Deam); Montgomery (Grimes); Posey
(Deam); Putnam (Grimes); Shelby (Deam); Sullivan (Deam); Vermillion
(Deam); Wells (Deam); Whitley (Deam).

[Illustration: Plate 97.

CRATÆGUS MOLLIS (Torrey and Gray) Scheele. Red-fruited Thorn. (× 1/2.)]

=22. Crataegus Phænopyrum= (Linnæus fils) Medicus. Washington Thorn.
Scarlet Haw. (_Crataegus cordata_ Aiton). Plate 98. Bark grayish-brown,
scaly; spines numerous, slightly curved, 2-5 cm. (3/4-2 inches) long;
leaves ovate-triangular, 2-8 cm. (3/4-3 inches) long and wide, simply or
doubly serrate, often 3-5 lobed, acute at the apex, rounded to cordate
at the base, bright green above, glabrous; petioles slender, 1.5-5 cm.
(1/2-2 inches) long, glabrous; corymbs glabrous, many-flowered; flowers
appear in June, 8-12 mm. (1/3-1/2 inch) broad; stamens about 20; anthers
pink; styles and nutlets usually 5; calyx lobes deltoid, entire,
deciduous; fruit ripens in October or November, depressed-globose,
scarlet, 4-6 mm. (1/6-1/4 inch) thick, nutlets with a bare apex and
smooth back, flesh thin, firm.

=Distribution.=--Virginia to Georgia, Indiana to Arkansas. Moist rich
soil. Naturalized in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Possibly it may be
naturalized at the Indiana station. More knowledge of distribution in
southern Indiana is needed to settle this question.

A shrubby tree sometimes 9 m. (30 feet) high, with nearly erect branches
and an oblong crown.

Specimens have been seen from Wayne (Deam). It also occurs in the Wabash
Valley.

=Horticultural Uses.=--This is one of the most desirable thorns for
ornamental planting and hedges. Its scarlet autumn foliage and beautiful
little scarlet fruit persist for a long time. It is also one of the
American thorns long in cultivation, both in Europe and the United
States.

=Crataegus álbicans= Linnæus. This species was reported for Indiana by
Heimlich.[52]

The material at hand is not sufficient to make a satisfactory
determination, hence it is omitted in the text.

According to the treatment of the genus Crataegus in Britton and Brown's
Illustrated Flora, 2nd Edition, the range of the following species
extend into Indiana.

  Throughout the State--               In the northern part of the State--

        C. Boyntoni.                           C. Brainerdi.
                                               C. lucorum.
  In the southern part of the State--          C. roanensis.
                                               C. beata.
        C. berberifolia.                       C. villipes.
        C. denaria.                            C. Pringlei.
        C. fecunda.
        C. ovata.

[Illustration: Plate 98.

CRATÆGUS PHÆNOPYRUM (Linnæus filius) Medicus. Washington Thorn.
(× 1/2.)]




=AMYGDALÀCEAE.= The Plum Family.


Trees or shrubs with alternate, simple, petioled and usually serrate
leaves; flowers perfect, calyx and corolla 5 numerous, stamens 15-30;
fruit a 1-seeded drupe.

The characters which separate the species are not at all constant, and
the species often vary much in the extremes of their range.


=PRÙNUS.= The Plums and Cherries.

  Flowers in umbel like clusters, or somewhat corymbose,
      appearing before or with the leaves on branchlets
      of the preceding year.

    Margins of leaves with sharp teeth.

      Petioles glabrous beneath                         1 P. americana.

      Petioles more or less pubescent all around.       2 P. americana
                                                           var. lanata.
    Margins of leaves with blunt or crenate teeth.

      Teeth of center of leaves about 10 per cm.; calyx lobes
          glandular; fruit more than 10 mm. in diameter.

        Principal leaves of fruiting branches generally
            more than 4 cm. broad; flowers white and
            generally more than 17 mm. wide.            3 P. nigra.

        Principal leaves of fruiting branches generally
            less than 4 cm. broad; flowers white which on
            age show a tinge of pink and generally less
            than 17 mm. wide.                           4 P. hortulana.
      Teeth of center of leaves about 20 per cm.; calyx
          lobes glandless; fruit less than 10 mm. in
          diameter.                                     5 P. pennsylvanica.

  Flowers in racemes, appearing after the leaves on
      twigs of the present year                         6 P. serotina.

=1. Prunus americàna= Marshall. Wild Red Plum. Plate 99. Small trees
with crooked branches; bark of old trees exfoliating in irregular
plates; twigs smooth; leaves obovate or oval, 5-9 cm. long, 2.5-5 cm.
wide, narrowed or sometimes rounded at the base, acuminate at apex,
margins sharply serrate or doubly serrate, glabrous above and smooth
below, or hairy on the veins and sometimes more or less pubescent over
the whole under surface, inner surface of petiole more or less hairy and
sometimes bearing one or two glands; flowers appear in April or May
before or with the leaves in clusters of 2-4 or sometimes singly, about
2 cm. in diameter, calyx smooth or with some hairs near the base of the
lobes which are pubescent within and smooth or hairy without, lobes
entire or cut-toothed above the middle, glandless or with inconspicuous
glands; fruit ripens in August or September, usually globose, about 2
cm. in diameter, red; stone doubly convex, oval to nearly orbicular,
surface usually smooth.

[Illustration: Plate 99.

PRUNUS AMERICANA Marshall. Wild Red Plum. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Massachusetts to Florida, west to Manitoba and south to
New Mexico. Found throughout Indiana. While it has a general
distribution, it is not generally distributed through the forests, but
is local in colonies in low grounds along streams or in low places in
the forest. In the southern counties it is found on the ridges and
commonly about the basins of sink-holes. Large single trees may be found
but they are usually surrounded by many smaller ones which are root
shoots. From this habit of the tree to produce root shoots large
colonies are formed which has given rise to the term "plum thickets."

=Remarks.=--The wood of this tree is of no economic importance, but the
species from a horticultural standpoint is one of the most important of
all of the plums. Many named varieties belong to this species.

It should be noted that all species of plums are quite variable, and one
must not be surprised to find specimens that will not come entirely
within the descriptions.

=2. Prunus americana= var. =lanàta= Sudworth. Woolly-leaf Plum. Plate
100. Small trees with the characteristic wild plum tree bark, except on
age it becomes more furrowed; twigs generally puberulent or sometimes
smooth; leaves obovate, oblong-obovate, or sometimes somewhat ovate,
generally about 6-10 cm. long, and 4-6 cm. wide, rounded at the base,
acute or short acuminate at the apex, margins sharply serrate, or doubly
serrate, upper surface covered with short appressed hairs, lower surface
permanently pubescent with longer hairs; petioles more or less pubescent
and often bearing one or more glands; flowers appear in April or May in
umbels of 2-4, upper part of calyx, and its lobes pubescent both inside
and out, the lobes more or less cut-toothed and bearing inconspicuous
glands; fruit ripening in September, globose, reddish with a bluish
bloom; stone nearly orbicular and turgid.

=Distribution.=--Indiana west to Indian Territory and south to the Gulf.
The range of this variety has not been well understood, and it is
believed that forms of this variety in the northern part of its range
have been included in the preceding species. It is certain that in our
area the two forms are separated with difficulty; especially is this
true of certain individuals. Specimens at hand show it to occur in
Floyd, Clark, Bartholomew, Martin, Warren, Vermillion, Gibson, Warrick,
and Perry Counties.

=Remarks.=--This form intergrades with the preceding to such an extent
that there is little difference between the extremes of the two forms.

[Illustration: Plate 100.

PRUNUS AMERICANA variety LANATA Sudworth. Woolly-leaf Plum. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 101.

PRUNUS NIGRA Aiton. Canada Plum. (× 1/2.)]

=3. Prunus nìgra= Aiton. Canada Plum. Plate 101. Small trees with the
characteristic bark of the genus; twigs smooth; leaves obovate or oval,
5-11 cm. long and 3-6 cm. wide, rounded or somewhat narrowed at the
base, abruptly short acuminate toward the apex, smooth or sparsely
covered above with a short appressed pubescence, more or less pubescent
beneath especially along the veins, usually pubescent on the veins at
maturity, margins crenate-serrate, the teeth ending in persistent
glands, petioles more or less pubescent on the inner surface, and
generally bearing a pair of glands, which number varies from 1 to 3, or
sometimes absent; flowers appear in April or May in umbels of 2-3, about
2 cm. in diameter--the largest of the genus in Indiana, calyx smooth,
the lobes smooth without and within, except toward the base which is
pubescent, the lobes reddish and the margins studded with numerous red
glands; fruit ripens in July, globose, red; stone short oval and very
flat.

=Distribution.=--New Brunswick to Massachusetts and west to Minnesota
and south to central Indiana. In Indiana it is definitely known only
from Wells, Blackford and Marion Counties. No doubt it ranges throughout
the northern part of Indiana, but it has not been separated from _Prunus
americana_. Higley and Raddin[53] in 1891, when our text books did not
separate this species, in a flora which included a part of Lake County
Indiana, remark: "There are two distinct forms of _Prunus americana_;
one with slender branches and large flowers with glandular calyx, found
in swamps and another found with stout branches and much smaller flowers
with the calyx less glandular, grows in dry soil." This no doubt refers
to the species under discussion.

In 1898 the author found this species growing in a swamp in Wells
County, and transplanted a specimen to high ground in his orchard. It
has persisted ever since, growing vigorously and freely suckering from
the roots, but it has been quite susceptible to the San Jose scale.

=4. Prunus hortulàna= Bailey. Wild Goose Plum. Plate 102. Small trees
with bark exfoliating in plates or rolls on old trees; twigs smooth;
leaves oblong-oval, oval, slightly ovate or obovate, generally 6-11 cm.
long and 2.5-5.5 cm. wide, rounded and often slightly oblique at the
base, acuminate at the apex, margins finely serrated with short rounded
and glandular teeth, generally glossy and smooth above, more or less
pubescent all over beneath with long hairs, the midrib and lateral veins
usually prominent below, petioles pubescent on the inner face and
usually bearing one or more glands; flowers appear with the leaves in
April or May in umbels of 2-4; calyx glabrous, the lobes glabrous on the
outer face, and more or less pubescent within, margins glandular; fruit
ripens in August, generally globose, red; stone generally short oval,
very turgid, face reticulated.

[Illustration: Plate 102.

PRUNUS HORTULANA Bailey. Wild Goose Plum. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Central Kentucky northwestward to central Iowa and
southwestward to Kansas and east to northwest Tennessee. In Indiana the
specimens at hand show it to be confined to the southwestern part of the
State, although Pepoon[54] reports a single tree found near Dune Park in
Porter County. It is found on sandy roadside cuts, base of sandy wooded
slopes, etc., and is a common tree in Sullivan County for miles on the
wooded bank of the terrace of the Wabash River.

=5. Prunus pennsylvánica= Linnæus filius. Wild Red Cherry. Plate 103.
Small trees with smooth cherry-like bark, somewhat roughened near the
base on old trees; twigs smooth, at least at maturity; leaves oval,
oval-lanceolate, or ovate, sometimes slightly falcate, 4-10 cm. long,
and 1.5-4 cm. wide, rounded or narrowed at the base, long acuminate at
the apex, margins finely serrate with glandular incurved teeth, glossy
and smooth above, generally smooth beneath, sometimes pubescent along
the midrib and veins, petioles generally smooth, rarely pubescent;
flowers appear with the leaves in May in umbels of 3-7, or sometimes
raceme-like but the rachis shorter than the pedicels; calyx glabrous,
the lobes glabrous within and without, entire and glandless; fruit
ripens in August, globose, 6-7 mm. in diameter, red; stone
roundish-oval, surface granular.

=Distribution.=--Newfoundland and New England to the Rocky Mountains,
south to Colorado and eastward through northern Indiana to Pennsylvania
and thence in the mountains to North Carolina. In Indiana it is
definitely known to occur only in Lake, Porter, Laporte, St. Joseph and
Lagrange Counties. It is frequently found on the black oak ridges about
Lake Michigan. All other reports of this species for Indiana should be
looked upon with suspicion. The one by Chipman from Kosciusko County may
be correct. The one by Ridgway[55] for Posey County is undoubtedly an
error. No doubt Phinney's[56] record for Central Eastern Indiana (Jay,
Delaware, Randolph and Wayne Counties) is an error.

The range of the species is to the north of our area, and like a few
others it is found about the Great Lakes south of its general range. In
Ohio it is reported only from Cuyahoga County which borders Lake Erie.

[Illustration: Plate 103.

PRUNUS PENNSYLVANICA Linnæus fils. Wild Red Cherry. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 104.

PRUNUS SEROTINA Ehrhart. Wild Black Cherry. (× 1/2.)]

=6. Prunus serótina= Ehrhart. Wild Cherry. Cherry. =Wild Black Cherry.=
Plate 104. Medium to large sized trees; bark of young trees smooth,
becoming on old trees irregularly fissured and separating in small scaly
plates; twigs slender and smooth, sometimes pubescent while young;
leaves oval, oblong-oval, ovate or narrowly ovate, generally 5-12 cm.
long and 2-4 cm. wide, generally narrowed at the base, sometimes
rounded, short or long acuminate at the apex, margin finely serrate with
incurved sharp callous teeth, smooth above and below, sometimes slightly
pubescent beneath while young; flowers appear in May, when the leaves
are almost grown, on the ends of the year's growth, in racemes generally
5-10 cm. long; fruit ripens in July and August, globose, about 6-10 mm.
in diameter, dark red to almost black.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia to South Dakota, south to Florida and west
to Texas. Found in all parts of Indiana. It prefers a moist loose soil
and is usually found with beech, sugar maple, tulip, white ash and white
oak. In the original forest it was a rare to a frequent tree, and only
rarely and locally did it ever become common. It grew to be several feet
in diameter and was as tall as the highest trees of the forest. The
trunk of the tree, however, was inclined to be crooked. It has now
become a frequent tree along fences.

=Remarks.=--The wood of wild cherry from pioneer times has been a
favorite wood, and for this reason the tree soon disappeared and today
large trees are very rare. The wood is strong, close-grained,
reddish-brown, and very much resembles mahogany. In value it stands
second in Indiana woods. It is used principally for furniture, office
and store fixtures.

The wild cherry grows readily from seed; is not difficult to transplant;
adapts itself to almost all kinds of soils and grows rapidly. In Spring
it is one of the very first trees to put out its leaves. It is not shade
enduring, which no doubt, in a great measure, accounts for its rarity in
the primeval forests. When grown in the open the tree usually produces
an abundance of fruit which is much relished by birds. This species has
many good features, and might be used to advantage in forest planting.




=CAESALPINÀCEAE.= The Senna Family.


  Leaves simple; flowers pink; seed pod papery              1 Cercis.

  Leaves compound; flowers not pink; seed pod woody or
      leathery.

    Trees with thorns; stamens 3-5, longer than the corolla;
        pods flat and leathery; seeds about 1 cm.
        (1/2 inch) long                                     2 Gleditsia.

    Trees without thorns; stamens 10, shorter than the
        corolla; pods swollen, woody; seeds about 2 cm.
        (1 inch) long                                       3 Gymnocladus.


=1. CÉRCIS.= The Redbud.

=Cercis canadénsis= Linnæus. Redbud. Plate 105. Small trees; bark of
trunk of old trees fissured, reddish-brown; twigs glabrous, light brown,
becoming a dark brown; leaves alternate, broadly ovate, average blades
6-14 cm. long, cordate at base, short-pointed, sometimes short-acuminate
or rarely rounded at the apex, margins entire, glabrous or pubescent on
unfolding, at maturity usually glabrous on both sides, or with a few
hairs in the axils of the veins or along the veins, sometimes more or
less pubescent beneath, and with hairs on the veins above; petioles
generally 2-6 cm. long; flowers appear in April or May before the
leaves, in clusters of 4-8 on the branches of the preceding season, pink
or rose color; pods 5-10 cm. long, thin, flat and glabrous; wood heavy,
hard and weak.

=Distribution.=--In Canada along the shores of Lake Erie and Ontario,
New York west through Michigan to Iowa, south to the Gulf States and
west to Texas. Found throughout Indiana except there are no records from
the counties bordering Lake Michigan. In the northern part of the State
it is rare or frequent in alluvial soil along streams or in rich woods.
In the southern part of the State it is a frequent to a common tree in
ravines and on slopes. It is never found in wet situations, and
consequently is absent in the "flats" of the southern counties.

=Remarks.=--The redbud is the common name for this tree throughout the
State. In one locality it was known as the fish blossom because the
larger fish spawn when this tree is in flower. In text books it is also
called Judas tree. It is usually a tree 1-1.5 dm. in diameter and 5-10
m. high. It is of no economic importance and is classed as a weed tree
in the woodlot and should be removed.

It is frequently recommended for ornamental planting. It prefers a rich
moist soil, and is shade enduring, although it succeeds best in the open
or in a light shade.


=2. GLEDÍTSIA.= The Honey Locust.

  Pods more than 8 cm. long; seeds oval                   1 G. triacanthos.

  Pods less than 8 cm. long; seeds orbicular              2 G. aquatica.

=1. Gleditsia triacánthos= Linnæus. Honey Locust. Plate 106. Medium to
large sized trees; bark of old trunks fissured and peeling off in
strips; spines on trunk large and often much branched, sometimes 4 dm.
long; spines on branches not so large, generally more or less forked;
twigs at first green, turning a light brown; leaves pinnate or
bipinnate, 1-2 dm. long, rachis permanently pubescent; leaflets 9-14
pairs, fewer on the bipinnate forms, petiolules about 1 mm. long, form
variable from ovate to lanceolate, sometimes somewhat falcate, generally
2-3 cm. long, usually more or less pubescent beneath; flowers appear in
May or June, inconspicuous, greenish-yellow, rich in honey, their
appearance being announced by the hum of the swarm of insects visiting
them; fruit a flat, linear twisted pod, 2-4 dm. long, glabrous and
lustrous or pubescent on the sides; seeds several, oval, about 6 mm.
wide, and 10 mm. long, glabrous and chestnut brown; wood heavy, hard,
strong, coarse-grained and takes a good polish.

[Illustration: Plate 105.

CERCIS CANADENSIS Linnæus. Redbud. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 106.

GLEDITSIA TRIACANTHOS Linnæus. Honey Locust. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Pennsylvania, southern Michigan to Iowa, and south to
the Gulf States and west to Texas. Found infrequently throughout Indiana
along streams, except that it is absent about Lake Michigan and that in
the southwestern counties it becomes a frequent tree in the Wabash
bottoms. In its native habitat it is rarely found except near a stream,
pond, lake, etc. However, in the southeastern counties it has spread all
over many of the hillsides which were once cleared and have been
abandoned for agricultural purposes and left to natural forest
regeneration. It was interesting to learn how this tree was able to
propagate itself on the steep bare slopes. It was found that the seeds
were scattered by cattle that greedily eat the fruit. It is a medium
sized tree, except in the Wabash bottoms of the southwestern part of the
State where it grows to be one of the largest trees of the forest, and
is more luxuriant than in any other part of its range.

=Remarks.=--In making a study of the fruit of this species, it was found
that the sides of all the pods of all the specimens at hand except one
are glabrous, even those of young fruit. The margins of the pods are
pubescent. However, a specimen collected on August 27th in Vermillion
County has the entire pod covered with long hairs. In consulting the
literature on the subject it is found that some authors describe the
fruit as glabrous while others describe it as hairy. It would be
interesting to study the significance of this character to learn if each
form has a geographic range.

The wood is used principally for interior finish, furniture, posts and
crossties. The tree has a grace that recommends it for ornamental
planting despite its thorns. However, a thornless variety is now offered
by nurserymen. It adapts itself to all kinds of soils, although it
prefers a moist rich soil; grows rapidly and is comparatively free from
insect damage.

[Illustration: Plate 107.

GLEDITSIA AQUATICA Marshall. Water Honey Locust. (× 1/2.)]

=2. Gleditsia aquática= Marshall. Water Honey Locust. Plate 107. A
medium sized tree with rather smooth bark, which becomes rough and flaky
on large trees; twigs greenish, turning to a light brown by the end of
the year; branchlets a greenish-gray brown; spines all usually more or
less flattened, those of the branchlets and branches, rather few and
usually simple, 4-10 cm. long, those of the trunk branched, spines do
not develop on the year's growth; leaves from old wood pinnate, from the
year's growth bipinnate; rachis grooved and pubescent or puberulent
above and smooth below; leaflets generally 7-11 pairs, variable in shape
and size, generally lanceolate and 1.5-2.5 cm. long, on petiolules about
1 mm. long, glabrous; flowers similar to the preceding species; fruit a
glabrous, shining, oblique pod about 4-5 cm. long, containing 1 seed;
seeds orbicular, flat, chestnut brown, about 1 cm. in diameter.

=Distribution.=--Atlantic Coast from North Carolina south to Florida,
and the Mississippi Valley from southwestern Indiana southward to Texas.
In Indiana this species is rare and limited to the banks of river
sloughs, locally called ponds and to one cypress swamp. It is known to
have occurred on the banks of Wabash and Dan's ponds and Little Cypress
swamp in the southwest corner of Knox County, and in Gibson County on
the bank of a slough near Skelton and about Burnett's pond. The
reference to Posey County is without a verifying specimen, although it
may be found in the county. The writer has visited about every place in
the county where the species might occur, and has never found it.
Gorby's[57] reference for Miami County is without doubt an error. In our
area it is a low crooked tree and grows with its base submerged more or
less during the year. The idea of the proportions of this tree can be
obtained from the measurements taken from the largest tree now known in
Indiana, which is located on the shore of Dan's pond in Knox County. It
measures 158 cm. (66 inches) in circumference at 1 m. above the ground,
and is estimated to be 10 m. (30 feet) high. This species is too rare to
be of economic importance.

=Gleditsia aquatica × triacanthos.= Dr. Schneck[58] found two honey
locust trees which he described as hybrids of the two species. The one
was located on the bank of Dan's pond in Knox County, and the other in
Gibson County. The original description is as follows: "In both
instances the pods are the distinguishing feature. These are very much
alike in both trees, being about 5 inches long, 1-1/2 inches wide,
smooth, shining, of a light brown color and entirely destitute of pulp.
Otherwise the tree cannot be distinguished from the trees among which
they stand. They are both about 50 feet high, with short stems and
spreading branches, and stand about 5 miles apart." The writer has five
fruiting specimens from these two trees, taken by Dr. Schneck. Two of
the sheets have the round and branched spines of _G. triacanthos_.


=3. GYMNÓCLADUS.= The Coffee Tree.

=Gymnocladus dioíca= (Linnæus) Koch. Coffeenut Tree. Plate 108. Medium
sized trees; bark of trunks fissured, the ridges often curling up along
the sides, very hard; twigs at first hairy, becoming glabrous and
mottled gray-brown by the end of the season, robust, usually about 1 cm.
in diameter; leaves alternate, twice pinnate, 3-9 dm. long, leaflets
usually 6-10 pairs, ovate, generally from 3-4 cm. long, generally
oblique and rounded, wedge-shape or truncate at the base, acute or very
sharp-pointed at the apex, petiolules about 1 mm. long, pubescent on
both sides at first, becoming glabrous or nearly so at maturity; flowers
of two kinds, the male and female on separate trees, appearing in May or
June; fruit a pod generally about 1-2 dm. long, thick, curved; seeds
generally 4-7, large, flattened about 2 cm. in diameter; wood heavy, not
hard, coarse-grained and takes a high polish.

=Distribution.=--New York, southwestern Ontario to southern Minnesota
south to Tennessee and Arkansas. This species has been reported or is
known to exist in 33 counties in various parts of the State. It no doubt
was native to every county of the State, except it be those bordering
Lake Michigan from which we have no reports. It is a rare tree in all
parts. Only exceptionally is it found even frequently. A few trees may
be found in one place, and it will not be found again for many miles. No
doubt there are many areas with a radius of 5 to 10 miles where this
tree never occurred. It is usually found in alluvial soil along streams,
or nearby terraces.

=Remarks.=--This species generally is not very tall, and is usually
found in open places in the forest or cut-over lands. However, one
specimen was seen in Posey County that was as tall as a specimen of
pecan of equal size that grew nearby. This species was so rare in this
vicinity that I was asked to drive three miles to identify this tree
which no one could name.

Coffeenut, which is sometimes called Kentucky coffeenut, has always been
so rare as to be of little economic importance. It has no qualities to
recommend it for ornamental planting.




=FABÀCEAE.= The Pea Family.


Trees, shrubs, vines or herbs with alternate leaves, mostly compound;
flowers with five petals which are pea-like (papilionaceous); stamens
generally 10; fruit a legume.

[Illustration: Plate 108.

GYMNOCLADUS DIOICA (Linnæus) Koch. Coffeenut Tree. (× 9/20).]




=ROBÍNIA.= The Locusts.


=Robinia Pseùdo-Acàcia= Linnæus. Locust. Black Locust. Plate 109. Medium
sized trees with deeply furrowed bark; twigs at first green and hairy,
becoming at the end of the season glabrous and a light brown, the
stipules developing in about a year into a pair of woody spines about 2
cm. long; leaves pinnate, 1.5-3 dm. long; leaflets 7-17 on short stalks,
ovate to oblong, 2-6 cm. long, rounded at base, rounded or pointed and
with a small indenture at apex, margin entire, pubescent on both sides
at first, becoming at maturity glabrous above and remaining more or less
pubescent below, especially on the midrib; flowers in loose racemes,
white, expanding in May or June; fruit a flat and slightly curved pod
about 5-10 cm. long, glabrous; seeds usually 4-8 in each pod, about 4
mm. long and 2.5 mm. wide; wood heavy, very hard, close-grained, takes a
good polish, very durable in contact with the soil.

=Distribution.=--Appalachian Mountains from Pennsylvania south to
northern Georgia, and in Arkansas. In Indiana it is found as an escape
in all parts and was doubtless native along the Ohio River, at least in
the southeastern part of the State. Thomas[59] says: "We had gazed at
the majestic beech of this country (near Rising Sun) three feet in
diameter; we had seen the honey locust, the black walnut, a buckeye of
equal magnitude; and then we saw with surprise, the black locust almost
a rival in stature." Drake[60] says: "The flowering locust is abundant
in Kentucky. Along the Ohio River it is rarely found more than 30 miles
north of the river."

=Remarks.=--This tree is generally known as the locust tree, but is
sometimes called the yellow locust.

Locust wood is somewhat lighter than white oak, but it is 34 percent
stiffer and 45 per cent stronger. These remarkable qualities added to
its durability in contact with the ground make it one of the most
desirable trees for forest planting. The wood has been used principally
for posts, ties, tree nails, etc. The locust when grown close together
usually grows to 8-12 inches in diameter. There are, however, specimens
that have grown in the open that are almost three feet in diameter. The
pioneers used it extensively for ornamental planting, and it has escaped
from such planting in all parts of the State. It propagates easily by
root shoots which is the principal mode of spreading, except where the
seed fall on exposed soil.

[Illustration: Plate 109.

ROBINIA PSEUDO-ACACIA Linnæus. Black Locust. (× 1/2.)]

The locust has of recent years been extensively planted for post timber.
It is very easily propagated from seedlings and grows rapidly. It is
adapted to all kinds of soil, except a wet one. It prefers a well
drained soil and seems to grow as fast in a loose clay soil as in a
black loam. When used for forest planting the spacing should be from 5 × 5
feet to 8 × 8 feet. The spacing should be governed by the quality of the
soil, and the amount of pruning that can be done. The locust has the
habit of having the terminal to end in a fork and having one or more
very large side branches. The best management requires that the very
large side branches be removed as soon as they are noted, and one part
of the terminal forks be cut off.

The locust until recently gave great promise of being an important tree
for planting sterile, washed and eroded slopes, on which it usually
thrives and in many cases grows thriftily. However, reports from all
parts of the State show that locust groves wherever planted are being
killed by the locust body borer. The locust has also been attacked by
the twig borer, bag worm and the leaf miner. At present there are no
known economic means of controlling these destructive pests, and until
they can be controlled, the planting of locust for commercial purposes
will not prove profitable.




=SIMARUBÀCEAE.= The Quassia Family.


=AILÁNTHUS.= Tree of Heaven.

=Ailanthus altíssima= (Miller) Swingle. Tree of Heaven. Stink Tree.
(_Ailanthus glandulosa_ Desfontaines). Plate 110. Medium sized trees
with dark gray bark, thin, rough or fissured on old trees; branchlets
very robust; twigs smooth; leaves compound and very large, especially on
coppice shoots, usually about 4-6 dm. long, odd-pinnate, arranged
spirally on the branchlets; leaflets 13-41, ovate-oblong, acuminate,
oblique at base, entire or with a few blunt teeth toward the base,
smooth or hairy when they unfold, becoming smooth at maturity, dark
green above, lighter beneath; flowers appear in June in large terminal
panicles, the staminate and pistillate on different trees; fruit
maturing in autumn, consists of many light brown, twisted and
broadly-winged samaras which are about 1 cm. wide and 4-5 cm. long.

=Distribution.=--A native of China. Introduced and spreading in cities,
and into fields and woods in the southern part of the State. The most
notable occurrence is in Jefferson County on the wooded bluffs of the
Ohio River between Madison and Hanover.

=Remarks.=--Where the sugar and black maple can not be used for shade
tree planting this tree should receive attention. It adapts itself to
all kinds of soils, and to all kinds of growing conditions such as
smoke, etc. The crown is of an oval or rounded type. It stands pruning
and injury to trunk or branches quite well. It is practically free from
all diseases and insect injury. The leaves appear late but they do not
fall until the first killing frost when they are killed, and frequently
practically all of the leaves will fall in one day. The staminate
flowers exhale a fetid odor for a few days which is about the only
objectionable feature in this tree. In order to obviate this objection,
nurserymen are now offering for sale pistillate trees which have been
grafted on common stock.

[Illustration: Plate 110.

AILANTHUS ALTISSIMA (Miller) Swingle. Ailanthus or Tree of Heaven.
(× 1/2.)]




=ACERÀCEAE.= The Maple Family.


=ÀCER.= The Maples.

Trees with terete branches; scaly buds; long petioled, opposite leaves;
fruit consists of two long-winged samaras which are joined at their
base, separating at maturity. The sap of some of the species, when
concentrated, yields the maple sugar and sirup of commerce.

  Leaves trifoliate or pinnate                            1 A. Negundo.

  Leaves simple.

    Winter buds blunt; flowers appear from lateral buds before
        the leaves; fruit maturing in the spring or early summer.

      Leaves entirely glabrous beneath at maturity, 5-lobed;
          the two sinuses between the three largest lobes
          generally somewhat closed, formed as it were by
          the arcs of two circles which meet to form the
          sinus, and which if they were extended outward
          would cross each other within a few dm. of the
          sinus; fruit more or less pubescent at maturity 2 A. saccharinum.

      Leaves are never all entirely glabrous at maturity,
          3-5 lobed; the two largest sinuses are generally
          angular with straight sides which if extended
          outward would never cross; fruit smooth at maturity.

        Twigs smooth at maturity; leaves at maturity smooth
            beneath except a few hairs in the axils of the
            veins, or more rarely the entire lower surface
            covered more or less with a short pubescence;
            mature fruit generally 2-3.5 cm. long         3 A. rubrum.

        Twigs more or less pubescent at maturity; leaves
            beneath covered with a dense tomentum which
            remains until maturity or sometimes becoming
            scanty; fruit about 4-5 cm. long              var. Drummondii.

    Winter buds acute, sometimes somewhat blunt; flowers
       appear from terminal buds after the leaves; fruit
       maturing in the autumn.

      Leaves yellow green beneath; base of the petiole of
          the terminal leaves enlarged at the base, smooth
          or somewhat pubescent about the enlarged base.  4 A. nigrum.

      Leaves not yellow green beneath; base of the petiole
          of the terminal leaves not enlarged, petioles smooth,
          or if pubescent at the base the pubescence will be
          more or less evident the entire length of the petiole.

        Petioles smooth; leaves 3-5 lobed, blade as long
            or longer than wide, not densely pubescent
            beneath at maturity.                          5 A. saccharum.

        Petioles smooth; leaves 3-lobed, blades wider than
            long.                                         A. saccharum var.
                                                                Rugelii.
        Petioles pubescent, rarely smooth; leaves 5-lobed,
            rarely 3-lobed, the under surface densely
            pubescent at maturity.                        A. saccharum var.
                                                                Schneckii.

=1. Acer Negúndo= Linnæus. Box Elder. Plate 111. A medium-sized tree
with a short trunk and round head; bark of young trees smooth and gray,
becoming thick on old trees, light to dark brown and more or less
furrowed or rarely somewhat flaky; twigs smooth and greenish; leaves of
average size are 1.5-3 dm. long, generally with 3 leaflets on the
flowering branches, sometimes 5 or rarely with 7, on sterile branches or
on growing shoots 3-7, the petioles generally 1/3-1/2 the length of the
leaf and glabrous or nearly so at maturity; leaflets all on stalks more
or less pubescent, the lateral stalks short, the terminal ones much
longer, leaflets of varying size and shape, the margins usually varying
from lobed to serrate or entire, pinnately veined, smooth above at
maturity and remaining more or less pubescent beneath, especially along
the veins; flowers appear just before the leaves the last of April or
the first of May, the staminate and pistillate on separate trees; fruit
matures late in summer, the body of the samara green and more or less
pubescent.

=Distribution.=--New England to Florida, west to Minnesota and south to
eastern Texas. In Indiana, it is found throughout the State in moist or
wet places along creeks and rivers, and infrequently on the highlands
along roadsides and fences. Its original distribution in the State can
only be conjectured. Judging from its tolerance to shade and its
habitat, and from the earliest reports of its occurrence in the State,
this species was quite rare in the northern part of the State, becoming
infrequent to frequent in its habitat in the southern part of the State.
Even today it is rather local in its distribution. I have never seen it
on the low mucky border of a lake.

=Remarks.=--This species on account of its rapid growth was formerly
much used in our area as a shade tree. It is believed that most of the
trees now found along roadsides, fences, clearings and on the drier
banks of streams are from seed distributed by the wind from planted
trees. This species is now little used as a shade tree and is never
recommended because it sheds its leaves early, and is subject to injury
from disease and insects.

[Illustration: Plate 111.

ACER NEGUNDO Linnæus. Box Elder. (× 1/2.)]

=1a. Acer Negundo= variety =violàceum= Kirchner. (_Rulac Nuttallii_
Nieuwland). This variety is distinguished by its glaucous twigs and by
the body of the fruit being glabrous at maturity. In most instances when
the bloom is rubbed from the twigs they show a purple tinge, hence the
varietal name.

=Distribution.=--I have this variety in Indiana from the following
counties: Brown, Cass, Elkhart, Franklin, Fulton, Hendricks, Henry,
Jennings, Lagrange, Martin, Posey, St. Joseph, Vermillion and Wayne.

=2. Acer saccharìnum= Linnæus. Silver Maple. Soft Maple. White Maple.
Plate 112. Medium sized trees; bark of small trees smooth and gray,
becoming on old trees reddish-brown, and freely splitting into thin
scales; branchlets light to reddish-brown and generally turning upward
at their tips; leaves generally about 1 dm. long, generally somewhat
cordate at the base, sometimes truncate, deeply 3-lobed, each of the
lateral lobes with an additional lobe below, margins of all of the lobes
more or less irregular or even lobed, the two principal sinuses
generally show a tendency to close, leaves hairy beneath when young,
glabrous above and below at maturity and very glaucous beneath; flowers
appear in March or April in the axils of the leaves of the previous
year, the staminate and pistillate in separate clusters on the same or
different trees; fruit on pedicels 1.5-6 cm. long, maturing in the
spring or early summer, green, densely hairy while young and remaining
more or less hairy at maturity, 4-7 cm. long, wings 1-2 cm. wide.

=Distribution.=--New Brunswick to Florida, west to South Dakota and
south to Texas. Locally frequent to very common in all parts of Indiana.
This species is always found in wet or moist places, and in the lower
Wabash bottoms in low overflow lands or in or about old sloughs it often
forms the principal stand. It is more frequently associated with black
willow, white elm, red birch, sycamore, etc.

=Remarks.=--The silver maple has been used extensively for shade tree
planting. The branches are very brittle, and ice storms sometimes break
off so many branches that the tree may be badly injured. The shade trees
of this species are in many parts of the state being killed by scale
insects, and for this reason it should not be used. On account of its
rapid growth it has also been much used for windbreaks but this practice
should be discouraged and better species used.

[Illustration: Plate 112.

ACER SACCHARINUM Linnæus. Silver Maple. (× 1/2.)]

=3. Acer rùbrum= Linnæus. Red Maple. Soft Maple. Swamp Maple. Plate 113.
Medium to large sized trees; bark of small trees smooth and gray,
becoming dark brown on old trees, somewhat furrowed and scaly;
branchlets smooth and reddish; twigs generally smooth but sometimes
hairy, becoming glabrous by autumn; leaves 5-12 cm. long, 3-5 lobed,
more or less cordate at the base, sometimes truncate or rounded, sinuses
acute, those of 3-lobed leaves generally wider angled than those of
5-lobed ones, the lobes more or less irregularly serrate or dentate,
hairy while young, glabrous above and more or less hairy beneath at
maturity, glaucous beneath; flowering period March or April; flowers red
or reddish, in the axils of the leaves of the previous year, the
staminate and pistillate in separate clusters on the same or different
trees; fruit maturing late in spring, on pedicels 3-8 cm. long,
generally red, sometimes green, glabrous at maturity, rarely somewhat
pubescent, 1.5-3.5 cm. long.

=Distribution.=--Newfoundland to Florida, west to Minnesota and south to
Texas. It is found in all parts of Indiana. Its preferred habitat is
that of low ground about lakes, swamps, along streams and in the "flats"
in the southeast part of the State. Throughout its range in Indiana
where it is found in low ground, it is in places rich in organic matter,
except in the "flats" of the southern part of the State where it grows
in a hard clay soil with sweet gum, red birch, etc. In contrast the
silver maple is generally found growing in wet places with little
organic matter; especially is this true in the lower Wabash bottoms. The
red maple grows also on high ground. In the northern part of the State
it is only an occasional tree of gravelly ridges or on high ground about
lakes or along streams. In the southern part of the State it is a local
to a frequent tree in most parts of the "knob" area where it is
associated with white oak, black oak, black gum, etc. It is also an
occasional tree on the top of bluffs and cliffs.

=Remarks.=--The red maple is not abundant enough in Indiana to be of any
economic importance. It grows rapidly and should replace the silver
maple for shade tree planting since its branches are not broken off as
easily by ice storms and it is more resistant to insect attack.

=3a. Acer rubrum= variety =Drummóndii= (Hooker and Arnott) Torrey and
Gray. This variety of the red maple is a form found in the dense swamps
of the lower Wabash Valley. It is distinguished from the type by its
twigs which generally remain more or less hairy until maturity; by the
under surface of the leaves remaining more or less tomentose during the
summer, and by its larger fruit. This variety is known with certainty
only from Little Cypress Swamp in Knox County about 12 miles southwest
of Decker. Here it is a frequent to a common tree associated with
cypress, swell-butt ash, button-bush, sweet gum, etc. All of the trees
of this locality have 5-lobed leaves.

[Illustration: Plate 113.

ACER RUBRUM Linnæus. Red Maple. (× 1/2.)]

A specimen collected in the "bottoms" about two miles east of
Huntingburg in Dubois County has 3-lobed leaves which are tomentose
beneath at fruiting time and has fruit intermediate in size between the
type and variety _Drummondii_ which I doubtfully refer to variety
tridens Wood.

=4. Acer nìgrum= F. A. Michaux. Black Maple. Black Sugar. Plate 114.
Medium to large sized trees with dark furrowed bark on old trees; leaves
a little wider than long, 6-15 cm. long, on petioles usually 3-15 cm.
long which are more or less swollen at the base and by maturity develop
a scale like appendage on each side of the petiole at the
base--especially on each of the terminal pair of leaves, sometimes with
foliar stipules which are 2-3 cm. long on stalks of equal length, leaves
with three main lobes, the two lower lobes generally have a small lobe
at their base, margins of lobes entire and undulating, sinuses between
main lobes generally rounded at the base, wide and shallow, base with a
narrow sinus, the lower lobes often overlapping, rarely somewhat
dentate, dark green above and a paler yellow green below, hairy on both
surfaces when young, becoming at maturity glabrous above and remaining
more or less pubescent beneath; flowers appear in May when the leaves
are about half grown on long hairy pedicels, the staminate and
pistillate in separate clusters on the same or different trees; fruit
matures in autumn, the samaras about 3 cm. long.

=Distribution.=--Quebec to Georgia, west to South Dakota and south to
Louisiana. Found in all parts of Indiana and invariably associated with
sugar maple, and often with beech in addition. Frequently almost pure
stands of sugar maple may be found with the black maple absent. Where
found it is usually a frequent to common tree, and when it occurs on a
wooded slope it is more frequent near the base and appears to be able to
advance farther into moist situations than its congener.

=Remarks.=--This tree cannot be distinguished from the sugar maple by
its form, but at short range can be separated from it by its richer
green foliage and by the drooping habit of the lower lobes of the
leaves. It is commonly separated from the sugar maple by the darker
color and by the narrower and shallower furrows of the bark, but these
characters will not always separate the two species. Hence, when buying
black maple trees from a nurseryman you may receive the sugar maple.
Those who distinguish the two species agree that the black maple is the
more desirable tree for shade tree planting. The black and sugar maple
are the two most desirable trees for shade tree planting in Indiana.
They are long lived, have a very desirable form, beautiful foliage, a
long leaf period, and are quite free from disease and insect injury.

[Illustration: Plate 114.

ACER NIGRUM. F. A. Michaux. Black Maple. (× 1/2.)]

=5. Acer sáccharum= Marshall. Sugar Maple. Sugar Tree. Hard Maple. Rock
Maple. Plate 115. Usually large, tall trees. The bark of small trees is
smooth or rough, becoming fissured on old trees, tight or on very old
trees sometimes the ridges loosen on one edge and turn outward. The
leaves are extremely variable on different trees, and frequently show a
wide variation on the same tree, as to form and in the presence or
absence of hairs on the petioles and on the under surface of the leaves.
In our area all of the forms which have the majority of the leaves
longer than wide or about as wide as long, may be considered as falling
within the type. The average sized leaves are 6-12 cm. long, 3-5 lobed,
more or less cordate at the base, generally with a broad sinus,
sometimes truncate or slightly wedge-shape, sinuses generally
wide-angled and rounded at the base, sometimes acute, hairy beneath when
young, becoming smooth at maturity except for a few hairs along the
veins or in the main axils of the veins, or sometimes remaining more or
less pubescent over the whole under surface, more or less glaucous
beneath; flowers appear in April or May, on hairy pedicels 3-7 cm. long,
the staminate and pistillate in clusters on the same or different trees;
fruit ripening in autumn, samaras glabrous and usually 2-4 cm. long.

=Distribution.=--Newfoundland to Georgia, west to Manitoba and south to
Texas. A frequent to a very common tree in all parts of Indiana. It is
confined to rich uplands, or along streams in well drained alluvial
soil. Throughout our area it is constantly associated with the beech. It
is absent in the "flats" of the southeastern part of the State, and on
the crest of the ridges of the "knob" area of Indiana, but it is a
frequent or common tree on the lower slopes of the spurs of the "knobs."

=Remarks.=--The under surface of the leaves of the sugar maple in the
northern part of its range are green, while those of the southern part
of its range are quite glaucous beneath. To distinguish these two
intergrading forms the southern form has been called =Acer saccharum=
var. =glaucum= Sargent[61]. All of the trees seen in Indiana have leaves
more or less glaucous beneath. This character, however, is not always
evident in dried specimens. The writer prefers not to apply the varietal
name to the forms of our area. The sugar maple always has been and will
continue to be one of the most important trees of the State. In its mass
distribution in Indiana it ranks not less than third. In the quality and
uses of its wood it is equalled or exceeded only by the oak, ash and
hickory. When compared with white oak it is a little lighter but thirty
per cent stronger and fifty-three per cent stiffer. The greatest amount
of the annual cut of maple is worked into flooring which is shipped to
all parts of the world. It is much used in the manufacture of furniture
and ranks third in use for veneer and hard wood distillation, and as a
fuel wood is excelled only by hickory. Since pioneer times, the sap of
this tree has been made into sirup and sugar and their manufacture now
forms a valuable industry. On an average it takes 3 to 4 gallons of sap
to make a pound of sugar, and an average sized tree will annually yield
about 3 to 4 pounds of sugar.

[Illustration: Plate 115.

ACER SACCHARUM Marshall. Sugar Maple. (× 1/2.)]

The sugar maple on account of its slow growth has not been used much in
reforestation. It is very tolerant of shade, can adapt itself to almost
all kinds of soils, thrives either in a pure or mixed stand, and is
practically free from injury of insects and diseases. It has, however,
been extensively used as a shade tree. For this purpose it is scarcely
excelled by any other tree. When grown in the open it almost invariably
assumes a symmetrical oval form, and the autumnal coloration of its
foliage is rarely surpassed by any of our trees. Where a large tree is
desired for street or ornamental planting the sugar maple can safely be
recommended.

=5a. Acer saccharum= variety =Rugélii= (Pax) Rehder. This variety of the
sugar maple has leaves much wider than long, smaller and 3-lobed. The
lobes are long acuminate and usually entire, sometimes the lower lobe
has a small lobe near the base. This variety is included in our flora on
the authority of C. S. Sargent who has given this name to specimens from
Indiana in the writer's herbarium. The specimens so named are from the
southern part of the State. While there is a wide range of difference in
the shape of the leaves of the typical 5-lobed _Acer saccharum_ and its
variety _Rugelii_, all intermediate forms can be easily found. The
leaves of a tree will vary most on those trees whose average shaped
leaves are farthest from the typical form.

=5b. Acer saccharum= variety =Schnéckii= Rehder. This variety in its
extreme form is well marked by having the petioles and under surface of
the leaves densely covered with hairs. The variety is characterized by
having a "fulvous pubescence," but the 18 specimens at hand show the
color of the pubescence on both young and mature specimens to range from
white to fulvous. The leaves of all specimens at hand are 5-lobed and
show a variation of leaves with petioles and under surface of leaves
densely pubescent to those with petioles glabrous and with densely
pubescent under surface. The habitat is that of a dry soil and
associated with beech. It has been found in Gibson, Martin, Perry, Posey
and Vanderburgh counties.




=AESCULÀCEAE.= The Buckeye Family.


=AÉSCULUS.= The Buckeyes.

Trees with dark or ashy-gray colored bark; twigs stout; buds large,
leaves opposite, palmately divided into 5-9 ovate or oblong divisions,
the divisions serrate; flowers in terminal panicles; fruit a 3-lobed
capsule. The fruit is poisonous to stock, although it rarely proves
fatal.

  Anthers protruding from the flower; fruit warty           1 A. glabra.

  Anthers included in the flower; fruit smooth              2 A. octandra.

=1. Æsculus glàbra= Willdenow. Buckeye. Plate 116. Medium to large sized
trees[62]; bark of old trees fissured, not tight; branchlets robust;
twigs at first more or less pubescent, remaining more or less hairy
until maturity; leaves large, 5-foliate, rarely 6 or 7 foliate, petioles
more or less pubescent; leaflets sessile or on very short stalks,
ovate-oblong, oval-oblong, or obovate, about 1 dm. long, acuminate,
narrowed to a wedge-shaped base, more or less pubescent beneath until
maturity, especially along the principal veins, margins irregularly
serrate except near the base; flowers generally appear in May when the
leaves are almost full size, but in the southern part of the State the
flowers sometimes appear the last of March, flower clusters 1-1.5 dm.
long, the whole inflorescence usually densely covered with white hairs,
flowers pale-greenish yellow; fruit a globular spiny capsule, generally
3-6 cm. in diameter, which usually contains 1-3 large glossy
chocolate-colored nuts.

The pubescence on the petioles, leaflets and inflorescence is generally
white, but often with it are reddish and longer hairs which are
scattered among the other hairs, except in the articulations of the
flowers, pedicels and leaflets, where they appear in tufts.

=Distribution.=--Pennsylvania south to Alabama, west to Iowa and south
to the Indian Territory. Found in all parts of Indiana. It is usually
associated with beech, sugar maple and linn. On account of the poisonous
character of its fruit, land owners have almost exterminated it.

From the data at hand it appears that the buckeye was a rare tree in the
northern tier of counties. However, as soon as the basin of the Wabash
is reached it becomes a frequent to a common tree where beech, sugar
maple, and linn are found. In all of our area it prefers a rich moist
soil, except in the southern counties it may be found even on the bluffs
of streams with the species just named. In the lower Wabash Valley
especially in Posey County it was a rare tree, or entirely absent.

[Illustration: Plate 116.

AESCULUS GLABRA Willdenow. Buckeye. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--In our area the buckeye is the very first tree to put out
its leaves. On this account in early Spring it can be easily
distinguished in the forest. This character together with its large
clusters of flowers which appear early are features which recommend it
for shade tree and ornamental planting. The tree has now become so rare
in Indiana as to have no economic importance.

=2. Æsculus octándra= Marshall. Buckeye. Sweet Buckeye. Plate 117.
Medium to large sized trees with smooth bark which on old trees becomes
more or less scaly. This tree closely resembles the preceding from which
it can be easily distinguished by the following characters. Its smoother
and lighter colored bark; by the entire under surface of the leaves
remaining permanently pubescent; the hairs more or less fulvous; by the
included anthers; and by its smooth capsule.

=Distribution.=--Western Pennsylvania, westward along the Ohio to Iowa,
south to Georgia and west to Louisiana and Texas. In Indiana it is
confined to a few counties along the Ohio River. The records of McCaslin
for Jay and Phinney for Delaware counties are doubtless errors in
determination. The writer has diligently tried to extend the range of
this species in Indiana and has found it only in Dearborn, Jefferson,
Clark and Crawford Counties, and in no place more than a mile from the
Ohio River. No doubt under favorable situations it found its way to a
greater distance from the River. On account of the poisonous character
of its fruit, it has been almost exterminated, and only along the
precipitous bluffs of the Ohio River are trees yet to be found.
Doubtless its exact range in our area can never be determined. Dr.
Drake[63] minutely described this species and remarks: "This species
delights in rich hills, and is seldom seen far from the Ohio River. It
frequently arrives at the height of 100 feet and the diameter of four
feet."

=Remarks.=--The wood is soft, white and resembles the sap wood of the
tulip tree for which wood it is commonly sold. Too rare in Indiana to be
of economic importance. Young[64] reported a purple flowered form of
buckeye from Jefferson County, but since no specimen was preserved and
the size of the plant is not given, it will not be considered here. The
form was reported as rare under the name of =Æsculus flava= var.
=purpurascens=.

[Illustration: Plate 117.

AESCULUS OCTANDRA Marshall. Sweet Buckeye. (× 1/2.)]




TILIÀCEAE. The Linden Family.


TÍLIA. The Basswoods.

Trees with medium sized twigs; leaves alternate, mostly taper-pointed,
oblique cordate or truncate at the base, serrate; flowers in axillary or
terminal cymes, white or yellow, fragrant, peduncles of the cymes with a
leaf-like bract adhering to about half their length; fruit nut-like,
woody, 1-celled.

  Leaves smooth or nearly so beneath                     1 T. glabra.

  Leaves densely white or gray pubescent beneath         2 T. heterophylla.


=1. Tilia glàbra= Ventenat (_Tilia americana_ Linnæus of authors). Linn.
Basswood. Plate 118. Medium to large sized trees with deeply furrowed
bark, much resembling that of white ash or black walnut; twigs when
chewed somewhat mucilaginous, usually somewhat zigzag; leaves on
petioles 2-6 cm. long, blades ovate to nearly orbicular, 5-15 cm. long,
short or long acuminate at the apex, margins more or less coarsely or
finely serrate with teeth attenuate and ending in a gland, dark green
and smooth above, a lighter green and generally smooth beneath at
maturity except tufts of hairs in the axils of the principal veins, or
sometimes with a scanty pubescence of simple or stellate hairs beneath;
flowers appear in June or July, when the leaves are almost mature;
bracts of the peduncles very variable, generally about 8-10 cm. long,
rounded, or tapering at the base, obtuse or rounded at the apex, smooth
both above and beneath at maturity; peduncles from very short up to 6
cm. in length; pedicels of flowers variable in length on the same and on
different trees, generally about one cm. long; styles pubescent near the
base on all of the specimens at hand; fruit woolly, globose or somewhat
ellipsoidal, generally about 6 mm. in diameter.

=Distribution.=--New Brunswick to Manitoba, south to Georgia and west to
Texas. More or less frequent to common in rich moist soil in all parts
of Indiana. It is the most frequent and common in the lake area of the
State but was almost as frequent and common throughout the central part
of the State until the hilly area is reached where its habitat
disappears for the greater part. In the hill area it is confined to the
basins of streams, although sometimes found on the high rocky bluffs of
streams. Rare or absent in the flats. In most of its area it is
associated with white ash, slippery elm, beech, maple, shellbark
hickory, etc.

=Remarks.=--Wood soft, light, straight and close-grained, white and
seasons well. On account of its softness and lightness it has always
been a favorite wood where these two factors were important
considerations. Is practically odorless, hence, is a desirable wood to
contain food products. Its principal uses are lumber, heading, excelsior
and veneer. The supply of this species in Indiana is now practically
exhausted.

[Illustration: Plate 118.

TILIA GLABRA Ventenat. Linn or Basswood. (× 1/2.)]

In Indiana this species is commonly called linn, and only in a few
counties near the Michigan line is it known as basswood. The name
basswood is a corruption of the name bastwood, meaning the inner tough
and fibrous part of the bark, which was used by pioneers for tying
shocks of corn, and other cordage purposes. However, Dr. Schneck gives
the name whittle-wood as one of its common names; and in some localities
it is called bee tree, because bees find its flowers rich in honey.

Linn is adapted to a rich moist soil, transplants fairly well, and grows
rapidly. It has been used to some extent as an ornamental and shade
tree, but its use as a street shade tree is no longer recommended
because it is not adapted to city conditions, and is killed by the
scale. It could, however, be recommended as an integral part of a
windbreak, or woodlot where the land owner has an apiary.

=2. Tilia heterophylla= Ventenat. Linn. White Basswood. Plate 119.
Usually large trees; bark similar to the preceding but lighter in color;
twigs similar to the preceding species; leaves on petioles 2-8 cm. long,
blades ovate to nearly orbicular, generally 7-15 cm. long, generally
oblique at the base, oblique-truncate or cordate at the base, abruptly
short or long acuminate at the apex, margins serrate with teeth
attenuate and ending in a gland, at maturity smooth and a dark
yellow-green above, the under surface generally densely covered with a
silvery or gray tomentum, however, on some specimens the pubescence is
thin and appears as a stellate pubescence, the tufts of hairs in the
principal axils of the veins are reddish brown, in addition to the
pubescence reddish glands are often found on the veins beneath; flowers
appear in June or July when the leaves are almost mature; bracts very
variable. 4-15 cm. long, generally on short peduncles, rounded or
wedge-shape at the base, generally rounded at the apex, sometimes merely
obtuse, glabrous both above and below, or more or less densely pubescent
beneath and generally sparingly pubescent above; pedicels of flowers
variable in length, usually about 1 cm. long; styles of flowers
pubescent at the base; fruit globose or somewhat ellipsoidal generally
6-8 mm. in diameter.

=Distribution.=--This species as understood by Sargent ranges from West
Virginia to Indiana and south to Florida and west to Alabama. In Indiana
it is confined to counties near the Ohio River. Specimens are in the
writer's herbarium from Dearborn, Ripley, Switzerland, Jefferson, Clark,
Harrison, Crawford, Perry, southeastern Dubois and east Spencer
Counties. Practically in all of its range in Indiana it is found on the
tops of high bluffs along streams or on the slopes of deep ravines. It
is an infrequent to a common tree where found. In general in the
counties just mentioned it supplants the other species of _Tilia_. It
was reported from Wayne County by Phinney, and Schneck says a single
tree was found near the mouth of White River. The last named tree may be
_Tilia neglecta_ which is said to be found just west in Illinois.

[Illustration: Plate 119.

TILIA HETEROPHYLLA Ventenat. White Basswood. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--Wood and uses similar to that of the preceding species. In
Indiana the species are not commercially separated.

A satisfactory division of the species of _Tilia_ of the United States
has long been a puzzle. C. S. Sargent[65] has recently published his
studies of the species and credits Indiana with two species and one
variety. His range of _Tilia neglecta_ might include a part of Indiana,
and it may be that the pubescent forms of _Tilia glabra_ in our area
should be referred to that species. Specimens No. 28043 and 28047 in the
writer's herbarium collected from trees on the high bluff of Graham
Creek in Jennings County, Sargent refers to =Tilia heterophylla= variety
=Michauxii= Sargent. While Sargent's key to _Tilia_ quite distinctly
separates the species and varieties, yet when specimens are collected
from an area where the species overlap and seem to intergrade, the task
of referring a specimen to the proper species or variety is not an easy
one. In fact the writer acknowledges his inability to satisfactorily
classify our forms of _Tilia_, and the present arrangement should be
accepted as provisional.




CORNÀCEAE. The Dogwood Family.


Trees or shrubs; leaves simple, alternate, opposite or whorled; fruit
mostly a drupe, 1 or 2 seeded.

  Leaves alternate; flowers of two kinds, the staminate in
      heads, 5-parted; stigmas lateral.                     1 Nyssa.

  Leaves opposite; flowers perfect, 4-parted; stigmas
      terminal.                                             2 Cornus.


=1. NYSSA.= The Tupelos.

=Nyssa sylvática= Marshall. Gum. Black Gum. Sour Gum. Yellow Gum.
Pepperidge. Plate 120. Medium to large sized trees; bark on old trees
deeply and irregularly furrowed, the ridges broken up into small
lengths; twigs at first pubescent, becoming glabrous; leaves
oval-obovate or oblong, blades 5-12 cm. long on petioles 0.5-2 cm. long,
rather abruptly acuminate at apex, narrowed at the base, sometimes
rounded, margins entire, petioles and both surfaces pubescent when they
unfold, becoming glabrous above and glabrous or nearly so beneath at
maturity; flowers appear in May or June, the staminate in clusters,
numerous, small greenish-white, the pistillate 2-8 or solitary; fruit
ripens in autumn, a fleshy drupe, 1-3 of a cluster ripening on a pedicel
2-6 cm. long, ovoid, usually 10-12 mm. long, blue-black, sour and
astringent; stone generally cylindric and tapering at each end and with
10-12 indistinct ribs.

[Illustration: Plate 120.

NYSSA SYLVATICA Marshall. Black Gum. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Maine, southern Ontario, southern Michigan,
southeastern Wisconsin[66] to Missouri and south to the Gulf. Found
throughout Indiana and no doubt was a native of practically every
county. It is an infrequent to a very rare tree in the northern half of
the State, becoming a common tree in certain parts of the southern
counties. In the northern part of the State it is usually found on dry
ground associated with the oaks, although it is also found with sugar
maple and beech.

=Remarks.=--Wood heavy, soft, very difficult to split. Woodsmen always
speak of two kinds of black gum. There is one form which splits easily
which is designated as "yellow gum." This distinction has not been
substantiated. The uses of gum are many. The quality of not splitting
makes many uses for it. The greater amount of gum is used as rough
stuff. In the manufactures it is used for mine rollers, heading, boxes,
hatter's blocks, water pipes, firearms, wooden ware, musical
instruments, etc.

The distinctive habit of growth of the black gum together with the
gorgeous coloring of the autumnal foliage recommend this species for
ornamental planting. It has an upright habit of growth, although the
trunk is more or less crooked. The crown when grown in the open is
usually pyramidal, composed of horizontal crooked branches.


=2. CÒRNUS.= Dogwood.

=Cornus flórida= Linnæus. Dogwood. Flowering Dogwood. Plate 121. Usually
a small tree[67] 1-2 dm. in diameter; bark deeply fissured, the ridges
divided into short oblong, pieces; branchlets slender, in winter
condition turning up at the tips; twigs green and smooth or nearly so
from the first; leaves oval or slightly obovate, blades generally 5-12
cm. long on petioles about 1 cm. long, generally abruptly taper-pointed
at apex, gradually narrowed and generally oblique at the base, margins
thickened and entire, or very slightly crenulate, appressed pubescent
both above and beneath, light green above and a grayish-green beneath;
flowering heads surrounded by an involucre of 4 large white or pinkish
bracts; the mature bracts are obovate, 2-4 cm. long, notched at the
apex, appear before the leaves in April or May; flowers are in a head,
numerous, small and greenish, opening usually about the middle of May as
the leaves appear or even when the leaves are one-third grown; fruit
ripens in September or October, an ovoid red drupe about 1 cm. long,
usually about 3-5 flowers of a head mature fruit; stone elliptic and
pointed at each end.

[Illustration: Plate 121.

CORNUS FLORIDA Linnæus. Dogwood. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Southern Maine, southern Ontario, southern Michigan, to
Missouri and south to Florida and west to Texas. Found in all parts of
Indiana. Frequent to very common in all beech-sugar maple woods of the
State. It is very rare or absent in the prairie area of the northwest
part of the State, although it has been found in upland woods in all of
the counties bordering Lake Michigan. It is also a frequent or more
common tree in most parts of the State associated with white oak, or in
the southern part of the State with black and white oak. It prefers a
dry habitat, and is rarely found in wet situations.

=Remarks.=--Wood hard, heavy, strong, close-grained and takes a high
polish. The Indians made a scarlet dye from the roots. It was used much
by the pioneers for wedges, mallets and handles for tools. The trees are
so small that they do not produce much wood. The present supply is used
principally for shuttles, golfheads, brush blocks, engraver's blocks,
etc.

The mature fruit is much relished by squirrels and birds.

The tree is quite conspicuous in the flowering season, and when the
fruit is maturing. These features recommend it for ornamental planting,
and it is used to some extent. The tree has a flat crown, and is quite
shade enduring. It is very difficult to transplant, and when the tree is
transplanted, if possible, some earth taken from under a live dogwood
tree, should be used to fill in the hole where it is planted.


=ERICÀCEAE.= The Heath Family.

=Oxydéndrum arbòreum= (Linnæus) DeCandolle. Sour Wood. Sorrel Tree.
Plate 122. Small trees with a gray and deeply fissured bark, much
resembling that of a young sweet gum tree; twigs and branchlets greenish
and smooth; leaves alternate, on petioles about a cm. long, oblong-oval,
generally 10-15 cm. long, narrowed at the base, acute or acuminate at
the apex, margins entire toward the base or sometimes all over, usually
about three-fourths is irregularly serrate with very short incurved
teeth, glabrous above and beneath except a puberulence on the midrib and
sometimes on the petiole to which an occasional prickle is added
beneath; flowers appear in June when the leaves are full grown, in large
panicles at the end of the year's growth, white, the whole inflorescence
covered with a short gray pubescence; fruit a capsule about 0.5 cm. long
on an erect and recurved pedicel of about the same length, maturing in
autumn.

[Illustration: Plate 122.

OXYDENDRUM ARBOREUM (Linnæus) DeCandolle. Sour Wood. Sorrel Tree.
(× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--A tree of the elevated regions of the area from
southeastern Pennsylvania to Florida and west to southern Indiana and
south to Louisiana. In Indiana it is definitely known to occur only in
Perry County at the base of a beech spur of the Van Buren Ridge about 7
miles southeast of Cannelton. Here it is a common tree over an area of
an acre or two. The largest tree measured was about 1.5 dm. in diameter
and 12 meters high. Here it is associated with beech, sugar maple,
dogwood, sassafras, etc. When coppiced it grows long slender shoots
which the boys of the pioneers used for arrows. A pioneer who lived near
this colony of trees is the author of this use of the wood and he called
the tree "arrow wood."




=EBENÀCEAE.= The Ebony Family.


=Diospyros virginiàna= Linnæus. Persimmon. Plate 123. Small or medium
sized trees with deeply and irregularly fissured bark, the ridges broken
up into short lengths; twigs pubescent; leaves alternate, oval,
oblong-oval or ovate, generally 8-15 cm. long and 3-7 cm. wide,
narrowed, rounded or cordate at the base, short pointed at the apex,
margin entire but ciliate, slightly pubescent above when young, becoming
glabrous on age, more or less pubescent beneath, sometimes glabrous
except the midrib and margin; flowers appear in May or June on the
year's growth when the leaves are about half grown, greenish yellow, the
staminate on one tree and the pistillate on another; fruit ripens in
August, September or October, depressed-globose or oblong in shape, 2-3
cm. in diameter, generally with 1-4 very hard flat seed.

=Distribution.=--Connecticut to Iowa and south to the Gulf. In Indiana
it is confined to the south half of the State. We have no record of wild
trees being found north of Indianapolis, except Prof. Stanley Coulter
reports three trees growing in Tippecanoe County in situations such as
to indicate that they are native. It is doubtful if it was ever more
than a frequent tree in the original forest. In some of the hill
counties of the south central part of the State, it has become a common
tree in clearings and abandoned fields. It grows long surface roots from
which numerous suckers grow which form the "persimmon thickets." It
seems to thrive in the poorest and hardest of soils. However, it reaches
its greatest size in the alluvial bottoms of the Lower Wabash Valley.
Here large and tall trees have been observed on the low border of
sloughs, associated with such water-loving plants as water-locust,
button-bush, swell-butt ash, etc. It thrives equally well on the high
sandy ridges of Knox and Sullivan Counties.

[Illustration: Plate 123.

DIOSPYROS VIRGINIANA Linnæus. Persimmon. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--The fruit is edible and the horticultural possibilities of
this tree have never received the attention they deserve. The opinion is
current that the fruit does not ripen and is not edible until it is
subjected to a frost. This is an error. The best and largest fruit I
have ever eaten ripened without a frost. A large native tree on the
Forest Reserve in Clark County ripens its fruit in August, which is of
an excellent quality and usually has only one, and rarely more than
three seeds. The fruit of this tree is of the oblong type. The fruit
varies much in size, time of ripening and quality. Some is scarcely
edible. Some of the native trees bear fruit when they are not over eight
feet tall, some are usually prolific bearers while others bear
sparingly. For this reason if one wishes to grow persimmon trees it is
best to buy grafted trees from some reliable nurseryman. The tree is
hardy throughout Indiana and while it is a very slow growing tree, it
can nevertheless be recommended for ornamental and roadside tree
planting. It is to be noted that cattle will not browse persimmon, and
that hogs greedily eat the ripe fruit. The fruit of many trees does not
fall until early winter, and such trees are a granary for several kind
of animals of the forest.

The wood is hard, heavy, strong and close-grained. Practically the whole
output of persimmon lumber is used in making shuttles. In Indiana the
tree is too rare to furnish much lumber.




=OLEÀCEAE.= The Olive Family.


  Leaves compound; fruit dry, a samara.                     1 Fraxinus.

  Leaves simple; fruit fleshy, a drupe.                     2 Adelia.


=1. FRÁXINUS.= The Ashes.

Trees with opposite, odd-pinnate leaves; flowers appear in April or May
in clusters from the axils of last year's leaves, the staminate and
pistillate on different or sometimes on the same tree; fruit a 1-seeded
samara.

  Bark of mature trees furrowed; fruit not winged to the base.

  Body of fruit robust, round and rather abruptly passing
  into the wing; the body rarely winged 1/3 its length.

  Shoots and axis of leaves smooth.                     1 F. americana.

  Shoots and axis of leaves velvety pubescent, at least
      when young.                                       2 F. biltmoreana.

  Body of fruit flattened and gradually passing into the
      wing; the body usually winged more than 1/3 its length.

      Shoots glabrous, or practically so.               3 F. lanceolata.

      Shoots velvety pubescent, at least when young.

        Calyx of fruit less than 3 mm. long; body of
            samara just below the wing less than 3 mm.
            wide, rarely 4 mm. wide, usually 1.5-2.5
            mm. wide; samaras 3-4.5 cm. long.           4 F. pennsylvanica.

        Calyx of fruit more than 3 mm. long, generally
            4-5 mm. long; body of samara just below the
            wing more than 3 mm. wide, usually 4-5 mm.
            wide; samaras generally 4-6 cm. long.       5 F. profunda.

  Bark of mature trees scaly or flaky; fruit winged to the base.

    Twigs usually 4 angled; leaflets on very short
        stalks.                                         6 F. quadrangulata.

    Twigs round; leaflets sessile.                      7 F. nigra.

=1. Fraxinus americàna= Linnæus. White Ash. Gray Ash. Plate 124. Large
trees with deeply furrowed bark; twigs smooth, greenish gray and often
covered with a bloom; leaves generally 2-3.5 dm. long, rachis smooth;
leaflets 5-9, usually 7, generally 5-14 cm. long, on stalks generally
0.3-1 cm. long, the terminal one on a stalk 2-4 times as long, leaflets
ovate to narrow-oblong, narrowed, rounded or oblique at base, short or
long acuminate at apex, sometimes merely acute, margins entire or
irregularly serrate, usually not serrated to the base, teeth short, dark
green and smooth above, glaucous beneath, sometimes almost green beneath
about Lake Michigan and in the northern tier of counties, usually
pubescent beneath along the midrib and along the veins, sometimes
glabrous; calyx persistent on the fruit, about 1 mm. long; fruit ripens
in September and October, linear, 3-4.5 cm. long, variable in size and
shape, body of samara cylindrical, somewhat narrower than the wing and
usually 1/3-1/4 the length of the samara, each face of the body usually
striated longitudinally with about 8 faint lines; wing terminal,
generally about 0.5 cm. wide, pointed or notched at apex.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia to Minnesota and south to the Gulf.
Frequent to common in all parts of Indiana. It is the most abundant in
the northern two-thirds of the State, where it is associated principally
with beech, sugar maple, linn, slippery elm and red oak. In the hilly
part of the State it is found principally near water courses and in
ravines, and rarely on the white and black oak ridges. It is rarely
found in the low "flats" of the southeast part of the State, or in the
shingle oak bottoms along the Patoka River.

=Remarks.=--The foliage of the white ash is quite variable in the
texture of the leaflets. Leaflets on some trees are quite thin while
those of other trees are thick and leathery, and no doubt would be
classed by Sargent as variety =subcoriacea=[68].

[Illustration: Plate 124.

FRAXINUS AMERICANA Linnæus. White Ash. (× 1/2.)]

A form of white ash with reddish-purple fruit is found from Steuben to
Clark County. This form is the prevailing type of white ash in Wayne
County in the vicinity of Centerville. It has been described by Fernald
as forma =iodocarpa=.[69]

The wood is heavy, hard, strong, elastic, sap wood white and the heart
wood light brown. It is one of the most valuable of Indiana woods, and
is used by almost all wood using industries. Its principal uses include
handles, butter tubs, car and vehicle stock, automobiles and implements.

The white ash has been under cultivation at the Clark County State
Forest for fifteen years, and the present indications are that it is one
of the very best species to use for forest planting. It is hardy; grows
in nearly all kinds of soil, although it prefers a moist, rich soil;
transplants successfully; grows rapidly; bears pruning well; erect in
habit of growth, and so far in our area forest plantings have not been
destroyed by injurious insects. However, in some parts of the State,
where trees have grown in the cities, some have been killed by scale
insects. Aside from this the white ash would be an excellent tree for
roadside planting, because it comes into leaf late, and never produces a
dense shade.

At present seed collectors are not able to separate the species of ash,
and as a consequence white ash seedlings bought from a nursery are not
always true to name. For this reason it is suggested that to obtain
seedlings true to name that seed be collected and planted from a tree
true to name. The seed should be planted in a sandy soil in rows, about
25 seeds to the foot, and covered about an inch deep with earth. The
trees should be planted 4 × 4 ft. to 8 × 8 ft. apart.

=2. Fraxinus biltmoreàna= Beadle. Biltmore Ash. Plate 125. Large forest
trees, resembling the white ash. Young trees acquire the furrowed bark
character earlier than the white ash, furrows of the bark of mature
trees are usually deeper, and the ridges correspondingly farther apart;
twigs are robust like the white ash and always velvety pubescent except
in age when they may become smooth; leaves generally 2-3.5 dm. long,
rachis pubescent; leaflets 5-11, usually 7-9, generally 5-14 cm. long,
on stalks generally 0.3-1 cm. long, the terminal one on a stalk 2-4
times as long, leaflets broadly ovate to narrow ovate, or oblong to
narrow oblong, narrowed, rounded, or oblique at the base, short or long
acuminate at apex, sometimes merely acute, margins generally entire,
sometimes with a few short teeth toward the apex, dark green and smooth
above, glaucous and more or less pubescent beneath; fruit similar to the
preceding species.

[Illustration: Plate 125.

FRAXINUS BILTMOREANA Beadle. Biltmore Ash. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--This species has only recently been separated from the
white ash and its range has not been ascertained. It is known to occur
in the Appalachian Mountains from Pennsylvania to Georgia. In Indiana it
is known to occur as far north as Wells County. It is commonly
associated with the white ash, but much less frequent except in a few
districts where it is the prevailing type. Such a district is in Gibson
County north of Owensville. Here as well as in other parts of Gibson
County very large trees have been observed. In the original forest the
pioneers called the very large specimens of ash with deeply furrowed
bark "the old fashion" ash. It is believed that most of these specimens
were of this species. In the hilly parts of Indiana this species is
found in situations too dry for the white ash, and for this reason
should be given preference in hillside planting.

On the wooded bluff of White River in Fairview Park north of
Indianapolis is a specimen that measures 31 dm. in circumference, b.h.
The deepest furrows on the north side of the tree are 6 cm. deep.

=Remarks.=--This species is not yet commonly separated from the white
ash and is known to the trade as white ash. Mr. Beadle who first
recognized the species, named it Biltmore ash in honor of the Biltmore
Estate on which the first tree was discovered. Authors ever since have
so called it, and the common name which this form should bear is
Biltmore ash.

On the Clark County State Forest is a planting of sixteen year old white
ash in which are mixed quite a number of Biltmore ash. This species at a
distance, can be distinguished from the white ash by the rougher bark of
the trunks and the darker green color of its foliage, and in the autumn
by its more colored foliage. A closer view shows that the leaflets of
the Biltmore ash stand in a plane above the rachis higher than those of
the white ash.

The wood is not commercially distinguished from the white ash, but its
mechanical properties rank it somewhat below that species.[70]

[Illustration: Plate 126.

FRAXINUS LANCEOLATA Borkhausen. Green Ash. (× 1/2.)]

=3. Fraxinus lanceolàta= Borckhausen. White Ash. Green Ash. Swamp Ash.
Plate 126. Medium to large sized trees with fissured bark, the ridges
and furrows narrower than those of the white ash; twigs slender and
glabrous at maturity; leaves generally 2-3 dm. long, rachis smooth,
rarely slightly pubescent; leaflets 5-9, usually 7, generally 5-15 cm.
long, on stalks generally about 0.5 cm. or less in length, the terminal
one on a stalk 2-4 times as long, leaflets generally narrow-oblong or
ovate to narrow ovate-oblong, generally with a narrowed base, sometimes
rounded and oblique, short or long acuminate at apex, margin entire near
the base, the remainder of the margin generally sparsely serrate with
short teeth, dark green and smooth above, a lighter green beneath and
more or less pubescent on the petiolules, midrib and veins; calyx
persistent, about 1 mm. long; fruit ripens in September and October,
linear or spatulate, 3-5 cm. long, variable in size and shape, body
1/3-1/2 the length of samara, compressed or flattened and gradually
narrowed to the base, usually less than half as wide as the wing, each
face of the body usually striated with about 2-4 lines which are
stronger than those near the edge of the body; wing generally 5-6 mm.
wide, pointed or notched at apex, and decurrent on the sides of the body
for about one-half of its length.

=Distribution.=--Lake Champlain to the Saskatchewan and south to the
Gulf. Found in all parts of Indiana. It is usually found in low ground
along streams, in swamps, and in low woods. It is usually associated
with white elm, red maple, cottonwood, aspens, linn, bur oak, etc., in
the south to this list should be added silver maple and cypress. It
prefers a habitat wetter than that of the white ash, although the two
are found together in wet woods. In swampy woods it is often a common
tree. While it has a general distribution in the State, it is much more
local than the white ash.

=Remarks.=--This form is not usually separated from the next species,
and both are known in books and by nurserymen as green or red ash. The
common name, green ash, should be applied to this species to separate it
from the true white ash, and the next.

In ash forest plantings on the Clark County State Forest, it is to be
noted that this and the next species bear fruit while the trees are as
small as 1.5 cm. in diameter, while the white and Biltmore ash which are
much older and 6-8 cm. in diameter have never borne fruit. This species
and the next bear fruit oftener and in greater abundance than the white
or Biltmore ash. It is also to be noted that practically all of the
volunteer ash trees found along fences and roadsides, except very large
trees, are of the green ash species.

The wood is similar to that of white ash, and the cut is usually sold as
that species. However, it ranks below white ash in its mechanical
qualities.[71]

While the native green ash is found growing in swamps, it adapts itself
to drier situations. It is planted more than any other species of ash in
the cold and dry regions of the West and Northwest.

[Illustration: Plate 127.

FRAXINUS PENNSYLVANICA Marshall. Red Ash. (× 1/2.)]

=4. Fraxinus pennsylvánica= Marshall. Red Ash. White Ash. Swamp Ash.
Plate 127. Usually medium sized trees much like the preceding; twigs
velvety pubescent at maturity; leaves generally 2-3 dm. long, rachis
pubescent; leaflets 5-9, usually 7, generally 5-15 cm. long, on stalks
generally about 0.5 cm. long, the terminal one on a stalk 2-4 times as
long, leaflets generally ovate, ovate-oblong, or oblong to
narrow-oblong, generally with a narrowed base, sometimes rounded and
oblique, short or long acuminate at the apex, margins sometimes entire,
generally entire near the base, the remainder more or less serrated with
shallow teeth, dark green and smooth above, a lighter green beneath and
more or less densely pubescent all over the lower surface, especially on
the midrib and veins; calyx persistent, about 1 mm. long; fruit can not
be distinguished from the preceding.

=Distribution.=--Quebec to Manitoba, and south to Florida. Found
sparingly in all parts of Indiana. It is usually found in low ground,
but frequently on bluffs, and flood plain banks.

=Remarks.=--This species is not commonly separated from the white ash
group, but in books it is known as the red ash. This is the common name
that should be applied to this form.

This species is not usually separated from the preceding, but it is
easily distinguished from it by its pubescent twigs. It can be
distinguished from the next by its smaller twigs, smaller calyx and
smaller fruit.

The wood is similar to that of the white ash, and the cut is usually
sold as that species. In mechanical qualities it is on a par with the
green ash.

=5. Fraxinus profúnda= Bush. Swell-butt Ash. Plate 128. Medium or large
trees with fissured bark similar to the white ash; twigs robust and
velvety pubescent at least while young; leaves generally 2-4 dm. long,
rachis densely pubescent, rarely almost smooth; leaflets 5-9, generally
7, on stalks 0.5-1 cm. long, the terminal one on a stalk 2-4 times as
long, leaflets ovate, narrow-ovate to narrow-oblong, narrowed or rounded
and oblique at the base, short or long taper-pointed at the apex,
margins entire, rarely with a few short teeth, dark green and smooth
above, a lighter green and densely pubescent beneath, rarely somewhat
smooth; calyx persistent, generally 4-5 mm. long, rarely as short as 3
mm.; fruit ripening in September and October, linear, generally 4-6 cm.
long, variable in size and shape, body about 1/3 the length of the
samara, compressed or flattened and gradually narrowed to the base, the
striations on the face of the body not prominent and usually not
distinct the full length of the body, samara often unilateral or
somewhat falcate; wings notched or merely rounded at the apex, decurrent
on the body 1/4-1/2 its length, sometimes almost terminal.

[Illustration: Plate 128.

FRAXINUS PROFUNDA Bush. Swell-butt or Pumpkin Ash. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Virginia, Indiana and Missouri, and south to Florida.
In Indiana the distribution has not been determined. It is a common to
an infrequent tree of the river sloughs and cypress swamps of the
southwestern counties. Authentic specimens are at hand from Knox,
Gibson, Posey, Perry, Bartholomew, Jackson, Marion and Daviess Counties,
and specimens from Hamilton, Tipton and Starke Counties, I doubtfully
refer to this species. The preferred habitat of this species is
inundated swamps, and when it grows in such situations it generally
develops a base swollen to a point somewhat above the water level. In
Bartholomew County it was found associated with the cow oak, and the
trunk resembled the white ash.

=Remarks.=--This species is known by authors and commercially as pumpkin
ash. The wood is similar to white ash but is inferior to that species.
On account of its habitat this species was little cut until the past few
years when ash became scarce. During the past few years most of the deep
river and cypress swamps have been invaded and all of the ash cut.

=6. Fraxinus quadrangulàta= Michaux. Blue Ash. Plate 129. Medium to
large sized trees with light gray bark, not regularly fissured, scaly at
least above; twigs and branchlets more or less distinctly 4-angled, the
angles of vigorous shoots develop corky wings about 2 mm. high; leaves
generally 2-3 dm. long; leaflets 7-11, generally 7-15 cm. long, on short
stalks, usually 1-5 mm. long, sometimes sessile, the terminal one on a
stalk generally about 1-2 cm. long, leaflets ovate to lanceolate,
narrowed or rounded at the base, generally long acuminate at the apex,
margins rather regularly and coarsely serrated with short incurved
teeth, yellow-green and smooth above, about the same color beneath and
generally smooth except along the veins, midrib and petiolules which are
permanently pubescent; calyx very small, usually about 0.5 mm. long, and
persisting more or less in fruit; fruit ripens last of June to August,
samaras twisted, generally 3-4 cm. long and 8-10 mm. wide, rounded at
the base, notched or rounded and apiculate at the apex, the apical end
of all specimens at hand twisted to the right, the wing surrounds the
body.

=Distribution.=--Southern Ontario to Iowa, and south to northern Alabama
and Arkansas. Found sparingly in most parts of Indiana, except the
northwest part. There are no records northwest of White and Noble
Counties. In the northern two-thirds of the State it is a rare to very
rare tree, generally found only along the bluffs of streams. In many
areas it is so rare that even the pioneers do not know the tree. It was
the most frequent in the southeastern part of the State. Here also it is
found principally along the higher banks of streams. While the species
is confined principally to high ground it also grew in lower ground. The
largest tree seen is on level ground at a fork of the road between
Charlestown and Jeffersonville about 3 miles northeast of
Jeffersonville. In 1918 this tree measured 28.2 dm. (104-1/2 inches) in
circumference breast high.

[Illustration: Plate 129.

FRAXINUS QUADRANGULATA Michaux. Blue Ash. (× 1/2.)]

This species has not been observed in the "knob" area of the State or
anywhere in the flats of the Lower Wabash Valley. Schneck reports it as
rare on the hills of this area. The tree is too rare to definitely
determine its associates, although sugar maple is usually found with it.

=Remarks.=--This species is becoming too scarce to be of much economic
importance. The cut is usually sold as white ash. The uses of the wood
are practically the same as the white ash.

The fruit and foliage of this species most closely resembles that of the
black ash, from which it can be distinguished by its greenish-yellow
foliage and the habitat in which it grows.

=7. Fraxinus nìgra= Marshall. Black Ash. Plate 130. Medium sized, tall
and straight trees with a light gray bark, broken up into small thin
plates on old trunks; twigs round, robust and smooth at maturity; leaves
2.5-4 dm. long, leaflets generally 7-11 and 7-13 cm. long, sessile, the
terminal one generally on a stalk 0.5-1 cm. long, oblong or
oblong-lanceolate, narrowed or rounded at the base, and short or long
acuminate at the apex, margins coarsely and rather irregularly serrate
with short teeth which are usually somewhat incurved, dark green and
glabrous above, not much lighter beneath and glabrous or pubescent along
the midrib and larger veins; calyx and corolla none; fruit ripens the
last of June to August, similar to the fruit of the blue ash, samaras
generally 3-4 cm. long, and 7-10 mm. wide, body winged all around, the
base of the samara rounded, the apex notched or rounded, the apical end
of the samara twisted more or less to the right in all specimens at
hand.

=Distribution.=--Nova Scotia to Manitoba, south to Virginia and northern
Arkansas. Local in all parts of Indiana except in the "knob" area of the
State. It is generally found in places that are inundated much of the
winter season. Its habitat is in cold swampy woods or similar places
about lakes. It has no special affinity for streams. It is local in its
distribution. Where it is found it is generally a frequent to common
tree. In the lake area of Indiana its habitat conditions are frequent,
consequently colonies of it are frequent. South of the lake area of the
State it becomes rare to extremely local. In the southwest part of the
State it has been sparingly found in a few cypress swamps. It is usually
associated with white elm, cottonwood, aspens, red maple, bur oak, and
is one of the first species to invade extinct tamarack swamps.

[Illustration: Plate 130.

FRAXINUS NIGRA Marshall. Black Ash. (× 1/2.)]

=Remarks.=--The wood is tougher but in most qualities is inferior to
white ash and cannot be used for handles. The layers of growth separate
easily which enables the wood to be separated into thin strips. This
fact was known to the Indians who used this wood for making baskets.
This use was continued by the white man and in addition it was a
favorite wood for making hoops, and in many sections it is known as the
"hoop ash." The wood has many uses such as for baskets, splint boxes,
butter tubs, vehicle stock, interior finish, furniture, etc. The black
burls of the trunk are much sought for by veneer manufacturers.


=2. ADÈLIA.=

=Adèlia acuminàta Michaux.= Pond Brush. Crooked Brush, Plate 131. Small
trees, or shrub like, with gray smooth bark, becoming rough or fissured
on large trees, the ridges short and broken; branchlets numerous and
somewhat spiny; twigs glabrous; leaves opposite on petioles about 1 cm.
long, ovate to elliptic-ovate, 4-11 cm. long, with a long narrow base,
long acuminate at the apex, margins entire near the base, the remainder
more or less coarsely serrated with short rounded teeth, rarely entire,
smooth above and beneath; flowers appear last of March to the first of
May, the staminate in small sessile clusters along the branchlets, the
pistillate in short panicles; fruit a dark purple drupe, oblong, about
15 mm. long; stone with many longitudinal ribs.

=Distribution.=--Southwestern Indiana and southern Illinois south to
northern Florida and Texas. In Indiana it has been found only in Knox,
Gibson, Posey and Perry Counties. It grows on the low borders of river
sloughs, swamps and river banks. It is very tolerant of shade and may be
found growing under larger trees. It usually forms dense thickets on the
bank that surrounds standing water and is usually associated with
button-bush. A straight specimen is rarely seen because the area where
it grows overflows each winter, and the small trees are usually covered
more or less with debris, and then the following season the side
branches assume a vertical growth. The top may be released by the next
inundation, and then other branches may assume leadership, and so on
until the top is a mass of branches growing in several directions. The
specimens found in Perry County grew on the low bank of the Ohio River
about 6 miles east of Cannelton. The species is quite local in the area
where it is found. It may border one river slough, and be entirely
absent from another nearby.

=Remarks.=--Of no economic use. In books it is called "swamp privet" but
in the area where it grows it is not known by that name.

[Illustration: Plate 131.

ADELIA ACUMINATA Michaux. Pond Brush. Crooked Brush. (× 1/2.)]




=BIGNONIÀCEAE.= The Trumpet Creeper Family.


=CATÁLPA.= The Catalpas.

Leaves simple, opposite or whorled, with long petioles; flowers in
terminal panicles or corymbs; fruit a long round pod which splits into
halves; seed many, flat, papery with a tuft of long hairs at each end.

A small genus of widely distributed trees. The species freely hybridize,
and have been cultivated and planted so extensively that it is difficult
to find typical specimens.

  Bark of old trees thin and scaly; odor of bruised leaves
      fetid; lower lobe of corolla entire.                  1 Catalpa
                                                              bignonioides.

  Bark of old trees fissured and ridgy; odor of bruised
      leaves not fetid; lower lobe of corolla notched at
      the apex.                                             2 Catalpa
                                                              speciosa.

=1. Catalpa bignonioìdes= Walter. Catalpa. (_Catalpa Catalpa_ (Linnæus)
Karsten). Plate 132. Medium to large sized trees, usually with a trunk
1-3 meters in length, and a wide crown; bark a grayish-brown, scaly and
flaking off in small thin plates; leaves ovate, blades usually 1.5-2 dm.
long, cordate at the base, taper-pointed at apex, margins entire, or
with 1 or 2 lateral lobes, yellow-green and smooth above, and pubescent
beneath; flowering period the last of May to the first of July, about
two weeks later than the next species; inflorescence in a rather compact
large panicle; flowers white, usually 2-3 cm. across at expanded end;
marked on the lower inner surface by two rows of yellow blotches, the
lower lobes marked with purplish spots, the lower lobe entire or nearly
so; fruit a long pod, generally 4-10 develop in each panicle, usually
1.5-4 dm. long, about 1 cm. thick, somewhat flattened, the valves
meeting at an angle which forms a ridge which is sensible to the
fingers, the valves of the pod are thin, and become flat after they
open; seed 2.5-4.5 cm. long, including the tufts of hairs at each end,
and about 4-5 mm. wide, the tuft of hairs usually converging to a point.

=Distribution.=--Supposed to be native to parts of Florida, Georgia,
Alabama and Mississippi. It has been introduced throughout the eastern
part of the United States. In Indiana it has been used in all parts as
an ornamental and shade tree. It has few qualities to recommend it, and
since the difference between this and the next species has been known
the next species is usually substituted for it.

[Illustration: Plate 132.

CATALPA BIGNONIOIDES Walter. Catalpa. (× 1/2.)]

[Illustration: Plate 133.

CATALPA SPECIOSA Warder. Catalpa. Hardy Catalpa. (× 1/2.)]

=2. Catalpa speciòsa= Warder. Catalpa. Hardy Catalpa. Catalfa. Plate
133. Medium to large sized trees with long and rather straight trunks
when grown in the forest; bark dark grayish-brown, fissured and much
resembling the bark of a linden or black walnut in appearance; leaves
ovate, generally 1.5-3 dm. long, cordate or somewhat rounded at the
base, long taper-pointed at apex, margins entire, dark green and smooth
above, pubescent beneath; flowering period May or June; flowers in large
terminal panicles, white with yellow and purplish spots within, expanded
part about 4 cm. across; fruit a long cylindrical pod which matures late
in autumn or early winter, 2-5 dm. long, and about 1.5 cm. in diameter,
usually 1 or 2 and rarely 3 pods develop in a panicle, the valves of the
pod remaining semi-terete after separating; seed many, thin and papery,
2.5-5 cm. long, and 4-8 mm. wide, body of samara about equals in length
the tuft of hairs at each end, the hairs remain separated and are little
inclined to form a tuft at the end.

=Distribution.=--Known to have been a native of the southwestern part of
Indiana, and to have followed the valley of the Ohio and Mississippi
Rivers to the southeastern part of Missouri and the northeastern part of
Arkansas. The tree has practically disappeared from the forests of
Indiana, and the exact range in Indiana can never be known. Being such a
conspicuous tree, it was thought that the memory of living pioneers
might be relied upon to fix the limits of its range in Indiana. One
pioneer living near Austin in Scott County said it was a native of the
Muscatatuck bottoms, and another said it was a native in the flats of
the southwestern part of Clark County. In its native habitat it was
found only in very low ground, usually with such associates as pin oak,
sweet gum, southern hackberry, big shellbark hickory, pecan, etc. In its
native habitat it was an infrequent to a frequent tree, never a common
tree. A pioneer was interviewed who settled in the Knox County bottoms
about three miles west of Decker, when the whole area was a virgin
forest. He said the catalpa was an occasional tree in the bottoms
throughout the area; that he did not recall that it was ever found in as
low situations as the cypress; that the tree was as tall as its
associates, straight, and usually about 6 dm. in diameter, and that he
never saw a tree a meter in diameter; that on account of the durable
quality of the wood that it was cut for fence posts and rails. A pioneer
who lived near the mouth of Deer Creek in Perry County said it was a
native in his vicinity. The information at hand would fix the mass
distribution of the species to the southwest of a line drawn from Terre
Haute to a point about 6 miles east of Grandview in Spencer County.

=Remarks.=--Attention was directed to this tree about 1880 by Dr. John
A. Warder and Dr. Geo. Engelmann, and it has had enthusiastic admirers
ever since. In Indiana its most enthusiastic advocate was John P. Brown
of Connersville. Its popularity was based upon the durability of its
wood and its rapid growth. Nurserymen grew seedlings and through their
agents plantations of all sizes were sold in many States. The trees
were planted to grow posts, telephone poles and crossties. In Indiana
there is one plantation 42 years old, but the majority are only 10 to 15
years old. The tree has been planted long enough in our area to
definitely conclude that it should not be planted in any part of Indiana
for economic purposes. The range of the catalpa sphinx which defoliates
the tree is rapidly increasing, and now ranges as far north as Wells
County. In the southern part of the State the trees are usually
defoliated twice each year by the larvæ of this insect, and as a
consequence the trees make very little growth, and some owners of
plantations have abandoned them on this account. A new insect is
appearing which kills the young shoots, which will interfere with the
upright habit of the tree. The catalpa is not recommended for forest
planting in Indiana, and its use for this purpose has practically
ceased.

The catalpa prefers a moist, deep, rich soil, but will grow in almost
all kinds of situations. In the northern part of the State, the young
trees are frequently winter killed. The tree is quite tenacious of life
and when cut off at the ground, usually sends up several coppice shoots.

This species can be recommended for planting for shade for hog lots, and
as a specimen tree in parks, etc. It is not a desirable street tree.




=CAPRIFOLIÀCEAE.= The Honeysuckle Family.


=VIBÚRNUM.= The Viburnums.

=Viburnum prunifòlium= Linnæus. Black Haw. Plate 134. Small trees or
shrubs; bark of old trees reddish-brown, furrowed and the ridges broken
into short lengths; leaves simple, opposite, on petioles 0.5-1.5 cm.
long; the lower pairs of leaves are generally smaller and have their
petioles more or less winged, red and more or less densely covered with
a rusty tomentum which may extend along the midrib and veins beneath or
may sometimes cover a considerable part of the lower surface of the leaf
while young, sometimes the margined petioles are only rough on the
margins; leaf blades very variable in size and shape, usually 4-10 cm.
long, ovate to slightly obovate, or narrow-oval to nearly orbicular,
narrowed or rounded at the base, pointed at the apex, or sometimes
rounded, margins finely serrate, glabrous both above and beneath at
maturity; flowers appear the last of April or in May in cymes which are
sessile or nearly so, flowers white, numerous, and generally about 0.5
cm. in diameter, fruit ripens in September and October, oval, oblong or
nearly globose, generally 10-14 mm. long, dark blue, covered with a
bloom, edible, and if not eaten by birds they persist on the branches
until late autumn; stone oval and very flat.

[Illustration: Plate 134.

VIBURNUM PRUNIFOLIUM Linnæus. Black Haw. (× 1/2.)]

=Distribution.=--Connecticut to Iowa and south to Georgia and west to
Texas. It is more or less frequent in moist woods throughout Indiana,
except in the hilly counties where it becomes more or less rare. In the
hilly counties its place is taken by the southern black haw, _Viburnum
rufidulum_ which only rarely attains tree size.

=Remarks.=--This species could be used to advantage in ornamental
planting where small trees or shrubs are required for a screen or back
ground. The fruit of the black and red haws attract several species of
birds.

This species is quite variable in the shape, and texture of its leaves,
and in the size and shape of its fruit. In the southern part of the
State specimens are found that have very thick leaves with margined and
tomentose petioles which very much resemble the southern species.




=SPECIES EXCLUDED.=


The following species have been reported for Indiana but have been
excluded for want of satisfactory evidence to warrant their inclusion:
The reasons for exclusion are discussed under the name of the species.
It is needless to say that critical examination has been given doubtful
species, and doubtful records, and every effort possible has been made
to validate them.

=Pinus echinàta= Miller. Short-leaf Pine. This species does not occur in
our area and all reference to it should be transferred to _Pinus
virginiana_. References to this species are instances of wrong
determination.

=Pinus resinòsa= Aiton. Norway Pine. This species was reported as an
escape in Wabash County by Coulter[72] for Jenkins.

=Pinus rígida= Miller. Pitch Pine. Baird and Taylor[73] reported this
species for Clark County. The range of this species is to the east of
our area. They also reported _Pinus Strobus_, which has not been seen
since they reported it, and they failed to report _Pinus virginiana_
which is a common tree on the "knobs" of Clark County. A study of their
flora of Clark County shows that they did little or no collecting in the
"knobs." They also freely reported field crop, garden and flower
escapes, and it is believed that their reference to _Pinus rigida_ and
_Pinus Strobus_ should be regarded as to cultivated trees.

=Àbies balsàmea= (Linnæus.) Miller. Balsam Fir. Heimlich[74] reports
this as occurring in Porter County about Dune Park. He cites for his
authority Bot. Gaz. Vol. 27: Apr. 1899. The article referred to is
Cowles' article on the flora of the sand dunes of Lake Michigan, in
which he discusses the flora from Glen Haven in northern Michigan to
Dune Park, Indiana in Porter County, which has confused Heimlich in
separating the trees reported at several stations. It has never been
found in Indiana.

=Chamæcyparis thyoìdes= (Linnæus) Britton, Sterns and Poggenberg. White
Cedar. The range of this species is east of the Alleghany mountains and
no doubt was never native in our area. The first reference to it is by
Dr. Drake in his Picture of Cincinnati, published in 1815, page 83, in
which he says: "The White Cedar and Cypress are found on the banks of
the Wabash." Schneck[75] in his Flora of the Lower Wabash Valley says:
"Wet places near the mouth of the Wabash River." I am certain it is not
on the Indiana side of the river. Gorby[76] reports it for Miami County.
All of his botanical records are too unreliable to receive serious
consideration. Coulter[77] reports it as found in Allen County on the
authority of Dr. C. R. Dryer. I saw Dr. Dryer recently and he says he
has no recollections about it.

=Juniperus commùnis= Linnæus. Juniper. This species has been reported
from all parts of the State. The distribution of the species is to the
north of Indiana, and examining herbarium specimens it is found that
subulate forms of _Juniperus virginiana_ are frequently named _Juniperus
communis_. In the older floras it was a custom to include cultivated
forms, and not distinguish them as such. Since juniper has been for
years a common ornamental shrub, especially in cemeteries, it is highly
probable that many records have such a basis. It is proposed to drop
this species from our flora. I refer Higley and Raddin's[78] record to
the decumbent variety. VanGorder's and Bradner's records may also be the
decumbent form. Heimlich's record I regard as an error, see remarks
under _Abies balsamea_.

=Populus balsamífera= Linnæus. Balsam Poplar. This species was reported
by Bradner for Steuben County. In a letter from the late Prof. Bradner,
he said he had no specimen and had no recollection of the tree. J. M.
Coulter reported it for Jefferson County, but Young who also wrote a
flora of Jefferson County does not mention it. Baird and Taylor also
reported it for Clark County. The last two records may have been from
cultivated trees or mistaken for _Populus grandidentata_ which was not
reported and is in the area, and is a frequent tree in the "knobs" in
Clark County. Heimlich reports it in Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci.
1917:404:1918 for Cowles. I regard this as an error. See discussion
under _Abies canadensis_ on page 290. Since the range of the species is
to the north of Indiana, it is here proposed to drop it from our flora.
It should be looked for on the "divide" in Steuben County and about Lake
Michigan.

=Populus cándicans= Aiton. Balm of Gilead. This species has been
included in a few local floras, but it is believed that it has not yet
escaped from cultivation. Phinney[79] gives it as "an important timber
tree of Delaware County," which is an error.

=Populus nìgra= var. =itálica= Du Roi. Lombardy Poplar. Reference is
made to this tree by Blatchley[80], Meyncke[81] and Nieuwland[82] but it
is scarcely more than an accidental escape.

=Carya aquática= Nuttall. Water Hickory. This species is listed as one
of the principal trees occurring along the Wabash in the Coblenz edition
of Prince Maximilan's travels in North America. It is recorded as "Water
Bitternut (_Juglans aquatica_)." If it occurs in our area it most likely
would be found in the extreme southwestern counties. It has been
reported from Gallatin County, Illinois, bordering Posey County on the
west. There are two other records of its occurrence in the State, which
are doubtful. Ryland T. Brown[83] reported it in a list of the principal
trees of Fountain County in a report of the geology of Fountain County.
_Carya laciniosa_, which is sometimes called swamp hickory and which is
more or less frequent in the county, he failed to report. It is believed
this reference to _Carya aquatica_ should be referred to _laciniosa_. B.
C. Hobbs also reported it as common in Parke County in a short list of
the principal trees. He named only four of the five or more species of
hickory that occur in the county, and it is believed since he was no
botanist, that he confused the names. Elliott in his Trees of Indiana
gives "_Carya aquatica_" as common, but no doubt this reference should
be transferred to some other species.

=Carya myristicæfórmis= Nuttall. Nutmeg Hickory. This tree also was
reported by Prince Maximilian as occurring along the Wabash River. The
known range of the species is from North Carolina to Arkansas, and for
this reason the species is not included in this list.

=Betula lénta= Linnæus. Black Birch. This species has been reported for
Indiana as occurring in Fulton, Gibson, Miami, Noble, Posey, St. Joseph
and Steuben Counties. Sargent[84] says: "This species has until recently
been badly misunderstood. The range of the species is southern Maine to
northwestern Vermont, eastern Kentucky, and south to Delaware and along
the Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia and Alabama." No doubt all
of the Indiana records should be transferred to _Betula lutea_, except
the Gibson and Posey County record which may be _Betula nigra_.

=Castanea púmila= (Linnæus) Miller. Chinquapin. This species was given a
place in our flora in Coulter's catalogue upon the authority of Sargent,
Ridgway and Schneck. Ridgway, in giving an additional list of the trees
of the Lower Wabash Valley[85] says: "There is some doubt as to No. 16
_Castanea pumila_, which is given on Prof. Sargent's authority; but
there is a possibility of an error having been made from the
circumstances that the name 'chinquapin' is in that region almost
universally applied to the fruit of _Quercus Muhlenbergii_." The Posey
County record was based on a specimen in Dr. Schneck's herbarium, which
proves to have been taken from a cultivated tree near Poseyville.

=Quercus ilicifòlia= Wangenheim. Bear Oak. This species is credited to
our flora by Will Scott in his ecological study of "The Leesburg Swamp"
in Kosciusko County, published in the Indiana Academy of Science, 1905,
page 225. In a reply to an inquiry addressed to him he says no herbarium
material was preserved. This ecological work was done during the summer
months while working at the biological station at Winona Lake. In a
footnote in this paper we are informed that for the identification of
the trees listed, Apgar's Trees of the Northern United States was used.
In this key to the trees, _Quercus velutina_ (Black Oak) is given only
as a variety of _Quercus coccinea_ (Scarlet Oak), and the distinction
between _Quercus velutina_ with its many formed leaves, and _Quercus
ilicifolia_ is not made apparent. In view of the fact that the natural
habitat of _Quercus ilicifolia_ is sandy barrens and rocky hillsides and
its western range is eastern Ohio, it is believed what Mr. Scott had in
hand was a variable form of _Quercus velutina_, which is frequent in
that vicinity. The evidence is not encouraging enough to include it.

=Quercus nìgra= Linnæus. Water Oak. This species has been reported by
several authors for Indiana. It is believed that a majority of the
records should be transferred to _velutina_ and _imbricaria_ or
_marylandica_. Gorby and Schneck call _Quercus nigra_ black jack oak,
which is generally the common name for _Quercus marilandica_. Ridgway in
his writings of the flora of the lower Wabash Valley, likewise speaks of
_Quercus nigra_ as jack oak and says it is found in poor soil. Coulter
in his catalogue of Indiana plants regarded these references to _nigra_
as errors and did not include it in his list. The report for Crawford
County by Deam should be transferred to _marilandica_. Since the range
of the species is not north of Kentucky, the reference to the species in
the State should be dropped.

The published records are as follows: Carroll (Thompson); Crawford
(Deam); Delaware, Jay, Randolph and Wayne (Phinney); Jay (McCaslin);
Fountain (Brown); Miami (Gorby); Parke (Hobbs).

=Quercus Phéllos= Linnæus. Willow Oak. This species has been reported
from various counties of the State. The tree is said to grow in swamps
and on sandy uplands, ranging from Staten Island, New York, south to
Florida and west to Texas, and north to southern Kentucky. If it occurs
within our area it no doubt would have been found by Dr. Schneck, who
was an enthusiastic student of the oaks. He reported it as occurring in
the lower Wabash in his early writings, but his herbarium contained no
specimens. The writer while in search for this species in Posey County
met three men in widely separated parts of the county who were
acquainted with the species in the South and they said they had never
seen it in Indiana. One of the men was an old man who had spent his
boyhood in Arkansas and he was well acquainted with the willow oak
before he came to Indiana. It is believed what has been reported for _Q.
Phellos_ has been narrow-leaved forms of _Q. imbricaria_ (shingle oak),
and that the records should be transferred to that species.

The published records are as follows: Gibson, Knox and Posey (Schneck);
Knox (Thomas); Miami (Gorby).

=Quercus prinoìdes= Willdenow. Scrub or Dwarf Chestnut Oak. Reported for
Marshall County by Nieuwland[86] on the authority of a specimen
deposited in the National Museum collected by Clark. I had this
reference checked by E. S. Steele and in a letter to me dated January 4,
1917, he says: "I find no specimen labeled _Quercus prinoides_, but
there is one named _Q. Prinus_. There is no ground for calling it _Q.
prinoides_." Since the specimen in question is a very immature one, I
propose not to take it into consideration since the range of the species
would be extended on a dubious specimen.

=Planèra aquática= (Walter) J. F. Gmelin. Planer-tree. Water Elm. This
tree was included in Coulter's catalogue upon the authority of Sargent,
who includes Indiana in the range of the species in his "Forest Trees of
North America," Vol. 9, U.S. Census Report, 1880, page 124. Dr. Schneck
spent a lifetime along the lower Wabash bottoms and very carefully
preserved specimens of all the flora of the region where this species is
reported to occur. In his report of the flora of this region in 1875 he
does not include this tree. An examination of his herbarium material
showed no specimens of this tree either from Indiana or Illinois. It is
fair to presume if he had been acquainted with the tree he would have
had it represented in his herbarium. Since the white elm is frequently
called water elm, as well as the planer-tree, it is easy to understand
how confusion might arise in separating these trees by non-professional
people.

=Morus nìgra= Linnæus. Black Mulberry. This species is reported by
Phinney[87] as one of the "more important and common forest trees
observed in Delaware County." He also enumerates _Morus rubra_. A
splendid example of careless work. This species is reported by Brown[88]
for Fountain County, and by McCaslin[89] for Jay County. These authors
reported this species as a native forest tree. Since this species is not
a native of the United States the citations no doubt should be referred
to our native mulberry, _Morus rubra_ (red mulberry).

=Ìlex opàca= Aiton. Holly. This species was included in Coulter's
Catalogue of the Plants of Indiana on the authority of Robert Ridgway. I
find no reference to this species in the writings of Ridgway.

In Shawnee Park on the west side of Louisville, Kentucky is a large tree
of this species. I was told that it was a native. A timber buyer of Tell
City told me that there was a native tree on his grandfather's farm in
the southern part of Perry County. Since this species has been reported
for Grayson County, Kentucky, which is less than forty miles to the
south, it is quite probable that a few trees were found as far north as
Indiana.

=Acer pennsylvánicum= Linnæus. Moosewood. The only record of this
species occurring in Indiana is in a report of the Trees occurring along
the Wabash River by Prince Maximilian. Since the report does not
definitely state where the species was observed or how frequently it
occurred and since the greater part of Maximilian's time was spent on
the Illinois side of the Wabash, it is more than likely that he observed
it on the Illinois side of the Wabash. While Indiana is within the
possible range of the species, it has not been discovered since. If not
extinct in our area it is most likely to be found among the hills of the
southern counties or in the vicinity of Lake Michigan. Robert Ridgway
says that he and Dr. Schneck saw it growing in a wooded cove near a
cavern called Flory's Cave in Johnson County, Illinois.

=Nyssa aquática= Linnæus. Tupelo Gum. Several early authors erroneously
reported _Nyssa sylvatica_ as this species. This species inhabits deep
swamps. Dr. Schneck and Robert Ridgway, recognized authorities and best
acquainted with the swamp area of the southwestern counties, at first
thought it was a member of our flora, but later decided that it should
be excluded.

Michael Catt, 83 years old, who lived nearly 75 years about three miles
west of Decker on the border of the cypress swamp in the south part of
Knox County, told me that he is positive that the tupelo gum was an
occasional tree in the cypress swamp west of Decker.

=Fraxinus caroliniàna= Miller. Water Ash. This species was included in
Coulter's Catalogue of Indiana Plants upon the authority of Dr. Schneck.
It is asserted that specimens were sent to Missouri Botanical Gardens
for verification. The writer has carefully examined all the specimens of
_Fraxinus_ in the Missouri Botanical Gardens, and all of Schneck's
specimens in the herbarium are now correctly named _Fraxinus profunda_.
Since this species is not in our range it should be dropped from our
flora.

TABLE OF MEASUREMENTS OF THE LARGEST TREES OF SOME SPECIES THAT OCCUR IN
INDIANA.

  ---------+-----------+-----------------------+-----------+-------+-------
  Authority|  County.  |       Name.           |  Circum-  | Clear | Total
           |           |                       |  ference. | Bole. |Height.
  ---------+-----------+-----------------------+-----------+-------+-------
           |           |                       |  cm.ft.in.|dm. ft.|dm. ft.
           |           |                       |           |       |
  Deam     |Laporte    |Pinus Strobus          |  267  8  8|... .. |229  75
           |           |  (White Pine)         |           |       |
  Deam     |Lake       |Pinus Banksiana        |  116  3 11|... .. |168  55
           |           |  (Jack Pine)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.[A]|Taxodium distichum     |  562 18  9|226 74 |445 146
           |           |  (Cypress)            |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Salix nigra            |  305 10 ..|... .. |268  88
           |           |  (Black Willow)       |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Populus deltoides      |  671 22 ..|229 75 |518 170
           |           |  (Cottonwood)         |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Populus grandidentata  |  112  3  8|217 71 |217  71
           |           |  (Quaking Aspen)      |           |       |
  Ridgway  |Knox       |Populus heterophylla   |  229  7  6|156 51 |281  92
           |           |  (Cottonwood)         |           |       |
  Deam     |Marshall   |Populus tremuloides    |  121  4 ..|168 55 |168  55
           |           |  (Quaking Aspen)      |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Juglans nigra          |  671 22 ..|226 74 |473 155
           |           |  (Black Walnut)       |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Carya alba             |  315 10  4|168 55 |342 112
           |           |  (White Hickory)      |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Carya glabra           |  229  7  6|... .. |351 115
           |           |  (Black Hickory)      |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Carya ovalis           |  294 10 ..|213 70 |409 134
           |           |  (Small-fruited       |           |       |
           |           |   Hickory)            |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Carya illinoensis      |  488 16 ..|275 90 |534 175
           |           |  (Pecan)              |           |       |
  Deam     |Madison    |Ostrya virginiana      |  117  3 10|... .. |122  40
           |           |  (Ironwood)           |           |       |
  Ridgway  |Knox       |Carpinus caroliniana   |  107  3  6| 21  7 | 98  32
           |           |  (Blue Beech)         |           |       |
  Deam     |Porter     |Betula papyrifera      |   63  2  1|... .. |183  60
           |           |  (Paper Birch)        |           |       |
  Deam     |Porter     |Alnus incana           |   42  1  5|... .. | 92  30
           |           |  (Tag Alder)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Fagus grandifolia      |  336 11 ..|... .. |372 122
           |           |  (Beech)              |           |       |
  Bot. Gaz.|Jackson    |Castanea dentata       |  671 22 ..|213 70 |... ...
   June '80|           |  (Chestnut)           |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Quercus alba           |  549 18 ..|220 72 |503 165
           |           |  (White Oak)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Quercus Schneckii      |  618 20  3|287 94 |552 181
           |           |  (Schneck's Oak)      |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Quercus falcata        |  427 14 ..|213 70 |396 130
           |           |  (Spanish Oak)        |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Quercus macrocarpa     |  671 22 ..|220 72 |503 165
           |           |  (Burr Oak)           |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Quercus Michauxii      |  395 13 ..| 88 29 |364 119
           |           |  (Cow Oak)            |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Quercus palustris      |  366 12 ..| 70 23 |366 120
           |           |  (Pin Oak)            |           |       |
  Ridgway  |Gibson     |Quercus rubra          |  702 23 ..|232 76 |... ...
           |           |  (Red Oak)            |           |       |
  Ridgway  |Knox       |Quercus rubra          |  427 14 ..|168 55 |436 143
           |           |  (Red Oak)            |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Quercus velutina       |  610 20 ..|229 75 |503 165
           |           |  (Black Oak)          |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Ulmus americana        |  488 16 ..|152 50 |366 120
           |           |  (White Elm)          |           |       |
  Ridgway  |Gibson     |Celtis occidentalis    |  336 11 ..|253 83 |183  60
           |           |  (Hackberry)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Liriodendron Tulipifera|  762 25 ..|278 91 |580 190
           |           |  (Yellow Poplar)      |           |       |
  Schneck  |Posey      |Asimina triloba        |   69  2  3|... .. |146  48
           |           |  (Pawpaw)             |           |       |
  Johnson  |Posey      |Sassafras officinale   |  236  7  6|229 75 |290  95
           |           |  (Sassafras)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Liquidambar Styraciflua|  518 17 ..|244 80 |500 164
           |           |  (Sweet Gum)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Platanus occidentalis  |1,116 33  4|207 68 |537 176
           |           |  (Sycamore)           |           |       |
  Bot. Gaz.|Daviess    |Platanus occidentalis  |1,464 48 ..| 76 25 |...  ..
   June '80|           |  (Sycamore)           |           |       |
  Deam     |Steuben    |Amelanchier lævis      |   56  1 10|... .. | 92  30
           |           |  (Juneberry)          |           |       |
  Deam     |Porter     |Prunus pennsylvanica   |   60  2 ..|... .. |107  35
           |           |  (Wild Red Cherry)    |           |       |
  Ridgway  |Knox       |Cercis canadensis      |   84  2  9| 70 23 |165  54
           |           |  (Redbud)             |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Gleditsia aquatica     |  212  7 ..|... .. |198  65
           |           |  (Water Honey Locust) |           |       |
  Schneck  |Posey      |Gleditsia triacanthos  |  549 18 ..|186 61 |593 129
           |           |  (Honey Locust)       |           |       |
  Deam     |Posey      |Acer Negundo           |  300  9 10| 24  8 |122  40
           |           |  (Box Elder)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Acer rubrum            |  396 13 ..|183 60 |329 108
           |           |  (Red Maple)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Acer saccharum         |  381 12  6|183 60 |345 113
           |           |  (Sugar Maple)        |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Tilia glabra           |  534 17  6|153 50 |332 109
           |           |  (Linn)               |           |       |
  Deam     |Jefferson  |Tilia heterophylla     |  356  8  8| 37 12 |183  60
           |           |  (White Linn)         |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Nyssa sylvatica        |  549 18 ..|... .. |... ...
           |           |  (Black Gum)          |           |       |
  Deam     |Posey      |Diospyros virginiana   |  178  6 10| 24  8 |137  45
           |           |  (Persimmon)          |           |       |
  Ridgway  |L. W. V.   |Diospyros virginiana   |  168  5  6|244 80 |351 115
           |           |  (Persimmon)          |           |       |
  Schneck  |L. W. V.   |Catalpa speciosa       |  183  6 ..|146 48 |308 101
           |           |  (Catalpa)            |           |       |
  ---------+-----------+-----------------------+-----------+-------+-------

[A] L. W. V.--Lower Wabash Valley.

Specific Gravity of Indiana Woods.[90]


The specific gravity was derived from wood dried at 100° centigrade (212
Fah.) until it ceased to lose weight.

  Carya ovata (Shellbark Hickory)                         0.8372
  Quercus stellata (Post Oak)                             0.8367
  Viburnum prunifolium (Black Haw)                        0.8332
  Quercus lyrata (Overcup Oak)                            0.8313
  Ostrya virginiana (Ironwood)                            0.8264
  Carya alba (White Hickory)                              0.8218
  Carya glabra (Black Hickory)                            0.8217
  Cornus florida (Flowering Dogwood)                      0.8153
  Carya laciniosa (Big Shellbark Hickory)                 0.8108
  Quercus Michauxii (Cow Oak)                             0.8039
  Diospyros virginiana (Persimmon)                        0.7908
  Amelanchier canadensis (Juneberry)                      0.7838
  Maclura pomifera (Osage Orange)                         0.7736
  Quercus bicolor (Swamp White Oak)                       0.7662
  Carya cordiformis (Pig Hickory)                         0.7552
  Quercus imbricaria (Shingle Oak)                        0.7529
  Quercus Prinus (Chestnut Oak)                           0.7499
  Ulmus alata (Cork Elm)                                  0.7491
  Quercus alba (White Oak)                                0.7470
  Quercus macrocarpa (Bur Oak)                            0.7453
  Quercus coccinea (Scarlet Oak)                          0.7405
  Gleditsia aquatica (Water Honey Locust)                 0.7342
  Robinia Pseudo-Acacia (Black Locust)                    0.7333
  Quercus marilandica (Black Jack Oak)                    0.7324
  Celtis occidentalis (Hackberry)                         0.7287
  Carpinus caroliniana (Water Beech)                      0.7286
  Ulmus Thomasi (Hickory Elm)                             0.7263
  Prunus americana (Wild Plum)                            0.7215
  Fraxinus quadrangulata (Blue Ash)                       0.7184
  Carya illinoensis (Pecan)                               0.7180
  Malus glaucescens (Crab Apple)                          0.7048
  Quercus velutina (Black Oak)                            0.7045
  Ulmus fulva (Slippery Elm)                              0.6956
  Quercus palustris (Pin Oak)                             0.6938
  Gymnocladus dioica (Coffeenut)                          0.6934
  Quercus falcata (Spanish Oak)                           0.6928
  Acer nigrum (Black Maple)                               0.6915
  Acer saccharum (Sugar Maple)                            0.6912
  Fagus grandifolia (Beech)                               0.6883
  Gleditsia triacanthos (Honey Locust)                    0.6740
  Betula lutea (Yellow Birch)                             0.6553
  Fraxinus americana (White Ash)                          0.6543
  Quercus rubra (Red Oak)                                 0.6540
  Ulmus americana (White Elm)                             0.6506
  Cercis canadensis (Redbud)                              0.6363
  Nyssa sylvatica (Black Gum)                             0.6356
  Adelia acuminata (Swamp Privet)                         0.6345
  Fraxinus nigra (Water Ash)                              0.6318
  Fraxinus pennsylvanica (Red Ash)                        0.6251
  Larix laricina (Tamarack)                               0.6236
  Acer rubrum (Red Maple)                                 0.6178
  Juglans nigra (Black Walnut)                            0.6115
  Betula papyrifera (Paper Birch)                         0.5955
  Liquidambar Styraciflua (Sweet Gum)                     0.5909
  Morus rubra (Red Mulberry)                              0.5898
  Prunus serotina (Wild Black Cherry)                     0.5822
  Betula nigra (River Birch)                              0.5762
  Betula populifolia (White Birch)                        0.5760
  Platanus occidentalis (Sycamore)                        0.5678
  Pinus virginiana (Jersey Pine)                          0.5309
  Acer saccharinum (Silver Maple)                         0.5259
  Sassafras officinale (Sassafras)                        0.5042
  Prunus pennsylvanica (Wild Red Cherry)                  0.5023
  Juniperus virginiana (Red Cedar)                        0.4926
  Pinus Banksiana (Gray Pine)                             0.4761
  Magnolia acuminata (Cucumber Tree)                      0.4690
  Alnus rugosa (Alder)                                    0.4666
  Populus grandidentata (Quaking Aspen)                   0.4632
  Alnus incana (Tag Alder)                                0.4607
  Taxodium distichum (Cypress)                            0.4543
  Æsculus glabra (Buckeye)                                0.4542
  Tilia glabra (Linn)                                     0.4525
  Castanea dentata (Chestnut)                             0.4504
  Salix amygdaloides (Willow)                             0.4502
  Catalpa bignonioides (Catalpa)                          0.4474
  Salix nigra (Black Willow)                              0.4456
  Acer Negundo (Box Elder)                                0.4328
  Æsculus octandra (Sweet Buckeye)                        0.4274
  Tilia heterophylla (White Linn)                         0.4253
  Tsuga canadensis (Hemlock)                              0.4239
  Liriodendron Tulipifera (Yellow Poplar)                 0.4230
  Catalpa speciosa (Catalpa)                              0.4165
  Populus heterophylla (Downy Cottonwood)                 0.4089
  Juglans cinerea (Butternut)                             0.4086
  Populus tremuloides (Quaking Aspen)                     0.4032
  Asimina triloba (Pawpaw)                                0.3069
  Populus deltoides (Cottonwood)                          0.3889
  Pinus Strobus (White Pine)                              0.3854
  Thuja occidentalis (Arbor-Vitæ)                         0.3164

[Illustration: Plate 135.

COUNTY MAP OF INDIANA.]

[Illustration: Plate 136.

COUNTY MAP OF INDIANA SHOWING CERTAIN AREAS OF FOREST DISTRIBUTION.]

[Illustration: Plate 137.

ENGLISH AND METRIC SCALES COMPARED.

These can be cut out and pasted on wood.]




FOOTNOTES:


  [1]  Ind. Geol. Rept. 22:93:1898.

  [2]  Amer. Mid. Nat. 3:70:1913.

  [3]  Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1901:297:1902.

  [4]  See discussion under Abies balsamea on page 290.

  [5]  Proc. Ind. Hort. Soc. 1892:53:1893.

  [6]  Ind. Geol. Surv. Rept. 5:338:1874.

  [7]  Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1897:173:1898.

  [8]  Baird & Taylor's reference to this species is regarded as a
       cultivated tree or as an error: Manual Public Schools of Clark
       County, Ind. 1878-9, page 62.

  [9]  Hamilton County by Wilson, no doubt from a cultivated tree.

  [10] Contributed by C. R. Ball, Bureau Plant Industry, Washington, D.C.,
       except the genus Populus.

  [11] Coulter's record for Gibson County by Schneck is regarded as an
       error because Schneck himself does not report it, and there was no
       specimen in the Schneck herbarium.

  [12] Deam's record in Rept. Ind. St. Board Forestry 1911:124:1912 was a
       manuscript error.

  [13] Ind. Geol. Rept. 17:263:1892.

  [14] Sargent in Bot. Gaz. Vol. 64: 58:1918.

  [15] Heimlich in Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1917:437:439:1918 credits most of
       my records jointly with Prof. G. N. Hoffer. This is an error. On my
       invitation Prof. Hoffer accompanied me nine days in the field doing
       mycological work. While he gave me valuable assistance in collecting
       during these days, his assistance and responsibility stopped there
       and he never asked or expected to be considered joint author. Again
       on our trip we collected only in Daviess, Gibson, Fountain, Knox,
       Lawrence, Martin, Pike and Sullivan Counties.

  [16] Sargent 1.c.

  [17] André Michaux's Travels 1793-1796.

  [18] Flora of Jefferson County. Ind. Geol. Surv. Rept. 2:283:1871.

  [19] Flora of Jefferson County. Ind. Geol. Surv. Rept. 6:265:1875.

  [20] Bot. Gaz. Vol. 66:236:1918.

  [21] Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1917:435:1918.

  [22] Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1917:435:1918.

  [23] Bot. Gaz. 66:237:1918.

  [24] Bot. Gaz. 66:244:1918.

  [25] Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1917:436:1918.

  [26] Trees and Shrubs 2:208-209:1913 and Bot. Gaz. 66:247:1918.

  [27] Bot. Gaz. 66:249:1918.

  [28] In 1916 in Allen County along Cedar Creek, I measured a specimen
       that was 15.6 dm. in circ. b.h. with a clear bole of about 3m.

  [29] Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1917:443:1918.

  [30] Ind. Geol. Rept. 18:61:1894.

  [31] Minnesota Bot. Studies 4:454:1916.

  [32] Sargent in Bot. Gaz. Vol. 65:435:1918.

  [33] This hybrid was described in the Report of the Indiana State Board
       of Forestry for 1911.

  [34] Elliott: Histological variations of _Quercus Muhlenbergii_.
       University of Kansas Science Bul. 9:45:54:8 Plates:1914.

  [35] Gorby: Trees and shrubs indigenous to Miami County, Ind. Geol.
       Rept. 16:168-170:1889.

  [36] Wilson: Flora of Hamilton and Marion Counties, Indiana. Proc. Ind.
       Acad. Science. 1894:156-176:1895.

  [37] Higley and Raddin: Flora of Cook County Illinois, and a part of
       Lake County Indiana. Bul. Chicago Acad. Sci. Vol. 2: 106:1891

  [38] Nieuwland: Notes on our local flora. Amer. Mid. Nat. Vol.
       3:230:1914.

  [39] Michaux: North American Silva. J. J. Smith's Trans. Vol. 1:37:1871.

  [40] Nieuwland: Notes on our local flora. Amer. Mid. Nat. Vol.
       3:230:1914.

  [41] Prof. B. Shimek told me that recently a few trees were found about
       30 miles west of Iowa City, Iowa.

  [42] Sargent: Notes on North American Trees. Bot. Gaz. Vol. 65:424:1918.

  [43] Brown: Trees of Fountain County, Ind. Geol. Rept. Vol. 11:123:1882.

  [44] Sargent: Notes on North American Trees. Bot. Gaz. Vol. 65:427:1918.

  [45] Bot. Gaz. Vol. 67:217-229:1919.

  [46] Hill: Notes on Celtis pumila, etc. Bul. Torrey Club:
       Vol:27:496-505:1900.

  [47] Bot. Gaz. Vol. 67:228-229:1919.

  [48] Garden & Forest 9:375:1896.

  [49] =Morus alba= Linnæus. White Mulberry. A small crooked tree; leaves
       ovate, sometimes lobed, blades 6-13 cm. long, cordate at the base,
       acute at apex, at maturity glabrous above and glabrous beneath or
       with some hairs on the veins and in the axils of the veins; fruit
       subglobose or oblong, 1-2 cm. long, white to pinkish. This is an
       introduced tree and has been reported as an escape in many parts
       of the State, especially by the older botanists. =Morus alba=
       variety =tatarica= Loudon, the Russian mulberry, has been reported
       as an escape. The writer has seen single specimens as an escape in
       woods in Cass and Marshall Counties. It can be distinguished by
       practically all of the leaves being more or less lobed and the
       reddish fruit. This form was introduced into the United States in
       great numbers about fifty years ago by the Mennonites. It was
       especially recommended by nurserymen for fence posts and it has been
       planted to some extent in Indiana, but it cannot be recommended. It
       grows too slowly and is too crooked to compensate for any lasting
       qualities the wood may have. =Morus nigra= has been reported from
       Indiana by Phinney, Brown and McCaslin as a forest tree. Since this
       is an introduced tree, and is not supposed to be hardy in our area,
       their reports should be transferred to some other species.

  [50] Amer. Midland Naturalist Vol. 3:347:1914.

  [51] Contributed by W. W. Eggleston, Bureau Plant Industry, Washington,
       D.C.

  [52] Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1917:445:1918.

  [53] Higley and Raddin: Flora of Cook County Illinois and a part of Lake
       County Indiana. Bul. Chic. Acad. Sci. Vol. 2:33:1891.

  [54] Trans. Ill. Acad. Science, 1916:132.

  [55] Amer. Nat. 6:660:1872.

  [56] Rept. Ind. Geol. Surv. 12:208:1883.

  [57] Ind. Geol. Rept. 16:169:1889.

  [58] Plant World 7:252:1904.

  [59] Thomas' Western Travels, page 111:1819.

  [60] Drake in Picture of Cincinnati, page 83, 1815.

  [61] Bot. Gaz. Vol. 67:233:1919.

  [62] S. Coulter: Size of some trees of Jefferson County, Ind. Bot. Gaz.
       Vol. 1:10:1875. He says: "Fifty trees were measured at three feet
       above the ground with an average diameter of 2 ft. and 9 inches. An
       equal number of _Æsculus octandra_ were measured at the same height
       from the ground with an average diameter of 2 ft. and 9 inches."

  [63] Drake: Picture of Cincinnatus:79:1815.

  [64] Young: Botany of Jefferson County, Ind. Geo. Surv. Ind. Rept.
       2:255:1871.

  [65] Sargent: Notes on North American Trees. Bot. Gaz. Vol. 66:421-438
       and 494-511:1918.

  [66] Wadmond: Flora of Racine and Kenosha Counties. Trans. Wis. Acad.
       Sci. Vol. 16:857:1909. The author says: "Two trees near Berryville,
       the only known trees of this species in the State."

  [67] In 1918 I measured a specimen near Yankeetown in Warrick County
       that had a clear bole of 3 meters (10 feet), and a circumference
       of 11 dm. (40 inches) b.h.

  [68] Bot. Gaz. Vol. 67:241-242:1919.

  [69] Rhodora Vol. 14:192:1912.

  [70] Sterrett: Utilization of Ash. U. S. Dept. Agri. Bul. 523:1917.

  [71] Sterrett: Utilization of Ash, U. S. Dept. Agri. Bul. 523:1917.

  [72] Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1900:141:1901.

  [73] Manual Public Schools Clark County, Ind. 1878-9, page 62.

  [74] Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. 1917:403:1918.

  [75] Rept. Geol. Surv. Ind. 7:562:1876.

  [76] Rept. Geol. Surv. Ind. 16:168:1889.

  [77] Rept. Geol. Surv. Ind. 24:617:1900.

  [78] Sci. Bul. Chic. Acad. Vol. 2:148:1891.

  [79] Ind. Geol. Rept. 11:148:1881.

  [80] Blatchley's, Mss. Flora of Monroe County, Ind. June 1887.

  [81] Bul. Brockville Nat. Hist. Soc. No. 1:38:1885

  [82] Amer. Midland Nat. Vol. 3:222:1914.

  [83] It is said that this list and that of Hobb's list of trees of Parke
       county were prepared by obtaining from farmers a list of the common
       names of the trees to which they attached botanical names.

  [84] Sargent in a letter to the author.

  [85] Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. 17:415.

  [86] American Midland Naturalist 3:320:1914.

  [87] Ind. Geol. Rept. 11:148:1881.

  [88] Ind. Geol. Rept. 11:123:1882.

  [89] Ind. Geol. Rept. 12:174:1883.

  [90] Adapted from Sargent's "Trees of North America."




INDEX


The accepted botanical names are in bold-face type. Synonyms are placed
in italics. Where the subject receives the most extended notice the page
number is in bold-face type.

                                                                  Page

  =Abies balsamea=,                                              =290=

  =Aceracea=,                                                    =239=

  =Acer=,                                                        =239=
    Negundo,                                      =240=, 241, 298, 300
    =Negundo= variety =violaceum=,                               =242=
    =nigrum=,                                          =246=, 247, 299
    =pennsylvanicum=,                                            =295=
    =rubrum=,                                     =244=, 245, 298, 300
    =rubrum= variety =Drummondii=,                               =244=
    =rubrum= variety =tridens=,                                  =246=
    =saccharinum=,                                       242, 243, 300
    =saccharum=,                                    248, 249, 298, 299
    =saccharum= variety =glaucum=,                               =248=
    =saccharum= variety =Schneckii=,                             =250=
    =saccharum= variety =Rugelii=,                               =250=

  Acknowledgments,                                                  16

  =Adelia=,                                                      =282=
    =acuminata=,                                       =282=, 283, 300

  =Æsculaceæ=,                                                   =251=

  =Æsculus=,                                                     =251=
    _flava_ variety _purpurascens_,                              _253_
    =glabra=,                                          =251=, 252, 300
    =octandra=,                                        =253=, 254, 300

  =Ailanthus altissima=,                                    =237=, 238
    _glandulosa_,                                                _237_

  Alder,                                                       90, 300
    smooth,                                                     92, 93
    speckled,                                                   90, 91

  =Alnus=,                                                   =90=, 297
    =incana=,                                   13, =90=, 91, 297, 300
    =rugosa=,                                    13, 90, =92=, 93, 300

  =Altingiaceæ=,                                                 =166=

  =Amelanchier canadensis=,                                 =177=, 178
    =lævis=,                                      =177=, 179, 298, 299

  =Amygdalaceæ=, =216=

  =Anonaceæ=,                                                    =161=

  Apple, American crab,                                  172, 173, 299
    Iowa crab,                                                     174
    narrow-leaved crab,                                       174, 175
    western crab,                                             174, 176
    thorn,                                                         180

  Arbor-Vitæ                                               32, 33, 300

  Arrow wood                                                       265

  Ash                                                              267
    Biltmore                                                  270, 271
    black                                                     280, 281
    blue                                                 278, 279, 299
    gray                                                           267
    green                                                     272, 273
    hoop                                                      148, 282
    pumpkin                                                        277
    red                                                  274, 275, 300
    swamp                                                     272, 274
    swell-butt                                                276, 277
    water                                                          300
    white                                           267, 272, 274, 299

  =Asimina triloba=                               =161=, 162, 298, 300

  Aspen, large-toothed                                          50, 51
    quaking                                                52, 53, 300


  Ball, Carleton R                                                  16

  Balm of Gilead                                                   292

  Banana, Hoosier                                                  161

  Basswood                                                    255, 256
    white                                                     257, 258

  Beech                                               94, 95, 297, 299
    blue                                                   78, 79, 297
    red                                                             96
    water                                                  78, 79, 299
    white                                                           96
    yellow                                                          96

  =Betulaceæ=                                                     =78=

  =Betula=                                                        =80=
    =alleghenensis=                                               =84=
    =lenta=                                         84, 85, =292=, 299
    =lutea=                                           =82=, 83, 84, 85
    =nigra=                                     84, =88=, 89, 293, 300
    =papyrifera=                                    =85=, 87, 297, 300
    =papyrifera × pumila glandulifera=                            =85=
    =populifolia=                                        =85=, 86, 300
    =Sanbergi=                                                    =85=

  =Bignoniaceæ=                                                  =284=

  Birch                                                     80, 82, 90
    black                                                  88, 89, 292
    canoe                                                   85, 87, 88
    gray                                                        85, 86
    paper                                         85, 87, 88, 297, 300
    red                                                     88, 89, 90
    river                                                      90, 300
    white                                              85, 86, 88, 300
    yellow                                                 82, 83, 299

  Botanic descriptions, comments on                                 13

  Box elder                                                   240, 241

  Britton and Brown                                                 16

  Buckeye                                           251, 252, 253, 300
    sweet                                                253, 254, 300

  Butternut                                                54, 55, 300


  =Cæsalpinaceæ=                                                 =226=

  =Caprifoliaceæ=                                                =288=

  =Carpinus caroliniana=                            =78=, 79, 297, 299

  =Carya=                                                         =56=
    =alba=                                               =68=, 69, 299
    =alba= variety =subcoriacea=                                  =70=
    =aquatica=                                                   =292=
    =Buckleyi= variety =arkansana=                            =76=, 77
    =cordiformis=                                    =61=, 62, 72, 299
    =glabra=                                             =70=, 71, 299
    =glabra= variety =megacarpa=                                  =72=
    =illinoensis=                                        =59=, 60, 299
    =laciniosa=                                     =66=, 67, 292, 299
    =myristicæformis=                                            =292=
    =ovalis=                                          70, =72=, 73, 74
    =ovalis= variety =obcordata=                                  =75=
    =ovalis= variety =obcordata= forma =vestita=                  =75=
    =ovalis= variety =obovalis=                                   =75=
    =ovalis= variety =odorata=                                    =75=
    =ovata=                                              =63=, 64, 299
    =ovata= variety =fraxinifolia=                                =65=
    =ovata= variety =Nuttallii=                                   =66=

  =Castanea dentata=                                =96=, 97, 297, 300
    =pumila=                                                     =293=

  Catalfa                                                          284

  Catalpa                                                284, 298, 300
    hardy                                                          284

  =Catalpa=                                                      =284=

  =Catalpa bigonnioides=                           13, =284=, 285, 300

  _Catalpa Catalpa_                                              _284_
    =speciosa=                               =284=, 286, 287, 298, 300

  Cedar, red                                               32, 35, 300
    white                                                          291

  =Celtis=                                                       =146=
    _laevigata_                                                  _151_
    =mississipiensis=                                       =151=, 152
    =occidentalis=                                147, =148=, 298, 299
    =occidentalis= variety =crassifolia=                         =148=
    =pumila=                                                =148=, 149
    =pumila= variety =Deamii=                               149, =150=

  =Cercis canadensis=                             =227=, 228, 298, 300

  =Chamæcyparis thyoides=                                        =291=

  Cherry, wild                                                     223
    wild black                                           223, 225, 300
    wild red                                        223, 224, 298, 300

  Chestnut                                            96, 97, 297, 300

  Chinquapin                                                       293

  Coffeenut                                              233, 234, 299

  Contents, table of                                                 9

  Conservation, The Department of                                   16

  =Cornacea=                                                     =259=

  =Cornus florida=                                     =261=, 262, 299

  Cottonwood                                          47, 49, 297, 300
    downy                                                          300
    swamp                                                       47, 48

  Coulter, Stanley, Commissioner                          16, 163, 251

  =Cratægus=                                                     =180=
    =albicans=                                                   =214=
    _alnorum_                                                    _200_
    =basilica=                                              =200=, 201
    =beata=                                                      =214=
    =berberifolia=                                               =214=
    =Boyntoni=                                                   =214=
    =Brainerdi=                                                  =214=
    =Calpodendron=                                          =191=, 193
    =chrysocarpa=                                           =194=, 195
    =coccinea=                                              =209=, 211
    =coccinea= variety =Elwangeriana=                            =212=
    _coccinea_ variety _oligandra_                               _206_
    =coccinoides=                                           =209=, 210
    =collina=                                               =188=, 189
    _cordata_                                                    _214_
    =Crus-galli=                                            =182=, 183
    =cuneiformis=                                           =182=, 184
    _deltoides_                                                  _203_
    =denaria=                                                    =214=
    _Dodgei_                                                     _194_
    _Edsoni_                                                     _200_
    _Eggertii_                                                   _209_
    =fecunda=                                                    =214=
    =filipes=                                               =203=, 205
    =Gattingeri=                                            =206=, 207
    =Jesupi=                                                =200=, 202
    =lucorum=                                                    =214=
    =macrosperma=                                           =197=, 199
    =macrosperma= variety =matura=                               =200=
    =Margaretta=                                            =185=, 187
    =mollis=                                                =212=, 213
    =neo-fluvialis=                                         =191=, 192
    =nitida=                                                =197=, 198
    =ovata=                                                      =214=
    _pausiaca_                                                   _182_
    _pedicillata_                                                _209_
    _pedicillata_ variety _Elwangeriana_                         _212_
    =Phænopyrum=                                            =214=, 215
    =Pringlei=                                                   =214=
    =pruinosa=                                              =206=, 208
    =punctata=                                              =185=, 186
    =roanensis=                                                  =214=
    _rotundifolia_                                               _194_
    =rugosa=                                                =203=, 204
    _silvicola_ variety _Beckwithae_                             _203_
    =succulenta=                                            =188=, 190
    =villipes=                                                   =214=
    =viridis=                                               196, =197=

  Crooked brush                                               282, 283

  Cucumber tree                                          157, 158, 300

  Cypress, bald                                       28, 31, 297, 300


  Deam, Stella M.                                                   16

  Dietz, Harry F.                                                7, 15

  =Diospyros virginiana=                          =265=, 266, 298, 299

  Distribution of trees, terms used to define                       14

  Dogwood                                                     261, 262
    flowering                                                 261, 299


  =Ebenaceæ=                                                     =265=

  Eggleston, W. W.                                             16, 171

  Elder, box                                        240, 241, 298, 300

  Elm                                                              140
    bitter                                                         140
    cork                                                           299
    gray                                                           140
    hickory                                              142, 143, 299
    hub                                                            140
    red                                                  138, 139, 140
    rock                                                      142, 143
    slippery                                             138, 139, 299
    sour                                                           140
    swamp                                                          140
    water                                                     140, 294
    white                                                140, 141, 300
    winged                                                    142, 144

  English and metric scales compared                               306

  =Ericaceæ=                                                     =263=


  =Fabaceæ=                                                      =233=

  =Fagaceæ=                                                       =92=

  =Fagus grandifolia=                               =94=, 95, 297, 299

  Fir, balsam                                                      290

  =Fraxinus=                                                     =267=
    =americana=                                        =268=, 269, 299
    =americana= forma =iodocarpa=                                =270=
    =americana= variety =subcoriacea=                            =268=
    =biltmoreana=                                           =270=, 271
    =caroliniana=                                                =296=
    =lanceolata=                                            =272=, 273
    =nigra=                                            =280=, 281, 300
    =pennsylvanica=                                    =274=, 275, 300
    =profunda=                                         =276=, 277, 296
    =quadrangulata=                                    =278=, 279, 299

  Frontispiece                                                       5


  =Gleditsia aquatica=                                 =230=, 231, 299
    =aquatica x triacanthos=                                     =232=
    =triancanthos=                                     =227=, 229, 299

  Gum                                                              259
    black                                                259, 298, 300
    sour                                                           259
    sweet                                           166, 167, 298, 300
    tupelo                                                         295
    yellow                                                         259

  =Gymnocladus dioica=                                 =233=, 234, 299


  Hackberry                                    146, 148, 151, 298, 299
    dwarf                                                     148, 149

  Haw, black                                             288, 289, 299
    dotted                                                         185
    pear                                                      191, 193
    red                                             180, 191, 209, 212
    scarlet                                                        214
    southern black                                                 289

  Hedge                                                            155

  Hemlock                                                  26, 29, 300

  Hickory                                                           56
    big scaly-bark                                                  68
    big shellbark                                      65, 66, 67, 299
    black                                             70, 71, 297, 299
    hard-head                                                       68
    nutmeg                                                         292
    pignut                                             61, 62, 72, 299
    shellbark                                          63, 64, 65, 299
    small-fruited                                      72, 73, 76, 297
    ladies                                                          76
    water                                                          292
    white                                             68, 69, 297, 299
    yellow-bud                                                      63

  Holly                                                       295, 298

  Hop hornbeam                                                      80

  Hough, R. B.                                                      16

  =Ilex opaca=                                                   =295=

  Illustrations, explanation of                                     15
    list of                                                         10

  Introduction                                                      13

  Ironwood                                                80, 297, 299


  =Juglandaceæ=                                                   =52=

  =Juglans=                                                       =52=
    _aquatica_                                                   _292_
    =cinerea=                                            =54=, 55, 300
    =nigra=                                         =54=, 57, 297, 300

  Juneberry                                              177, 298, 299
    smooth                                                    177, 179

  Juniper                                                          291

  =Juniperus communis=                                           =291=
    =virginiana=                                    =32=, 35, 291, 300


  =Kalmia latifolia=                                              =84=
    Key to the families of Indiana trees                            17


  Larch                                                             26

  =Larix laricina=                                       =26=, 27, 300

  =Lauraceæ=                                                     =163=

  Laurel                                                            84

  Lieber, Richard                                                    7

  Linn                                              255, 256, 298, 300

  =Liquidambar Styraciflua=                       =166=, 167, 298, 300

  =Liriodendron Tulipifera=                       =159=, 160, 298, 300

  Locust                                                           235
    black                                                235, 236, 299
    honey                                           227, 229, 298, 299
    water honey                                     230, 231, 298, 299
    yellow                                                         235


  =Maclura pomifera=                                   =155=, 156, 299

  =Magnoliaceæ=                                                  =155=

  =Magnolia acuminata=                                 =157=, 158, 300

  =Malaceæ=                                                      =171=

  =Malus=                                                        =171=
    =angustifolia=                                               =171=
    _coronaria_                                             _174_, 176
    _fragrans_                                                   _172_
    =glaucescens=                                      =172=, 173, 299
    =ioensis=                                                    =174=
    =ioensis= × lancifolia                                       =177=
    =lancifolia=                                            =174=, 175

  Maple, black                                           246, 247, 299
    black sugar                                                    246
    hard                                                           248
    red                                             244, 245, 298, 300
    rock                                                           248
    silver                                               242, 243, 300
    soft                                                      242, 244
    sugar                                           248, 249, 298, 299
    swamp                                                          244
    white                                                          242

  Map of certain forestal areas of Indiana                         302
    explanation of                                                  15

  Map of Indiana                                                   301

  Moosewood                                                        295

  =Moraceæ=                                                      =151=

  =Morus=                                                        =153=
    =alba=                                                       =155=
    =alba= variety =tatarica=                                    =155=
    =nigra=                                                 155, =295=
    =rubra=                                       =153=, 154, 298, 300

  Mulberry, red                                153, 154, 155, 298, 300
    black                                                          295
    white                                                          155


  Nomenclature                                                      14

  =Nyssa aquatica=                                               =295=
    =sylvatica=                                   =259=, 260, 295, 300


  Oak                                                               98
    basket                                                    107, 108
    bear                                                           294
    black                                 119, 127, 129, 135, 298, 299
    black jack                                           135, 136, 299
    bur                                   104, 115, 116, 117, 297, 299
    chestnut                                        104, 110, 111, 299
    chinquapin                                                104, 106
    cow                                             107, 108, 297, 299
    dwarf chestnut                                                 294
    Hill's                                                    127, 128
    iron                                                           114
    jack                                                           119
    mossy cup                                                      116
    over cup                                             117, 118, 299
    peach                                                          119
    pigeon                                                         107
    pin                                             123, 124, 297, 299
    post                                                 112, 113, 300
    red                                   121, 122, 126, 135, 297, 299
    sand bur                                                       114
    scarlet                                              131, 132, 299
    Schneck's                                                 123, 125
    scrub                                                          294
    shingle                                              119, 120, 299
    Spanish                                    131, 133, 134, 297, 299
    swamp                                                          123
    swamp white                                          104, 105, 299
    sweet                                                          104
    water                                                119, 123, 294
    white                                           101, 102, 297, 299
    willow                                                         294
    yellow                                                    104, 131

  =Oleaceæ=                                                      =267=

  Osage Orange                                           155, 156, 299

  =Ostrya virginiana=                                    =80=, 81, 299
    =virginiana= variety =glandulosa=                             =80=

  =Oxydendrum arboreum=                                     =263=, 264


  Pawpaw                                                 161, 162, 298
    white                                                          161
    yellow                                                         161

  Pecan                                               59, 60, 297, 299
    McCallister                                                     60

  Pepperidge                                                       259

  Persimmon                                         265, 266, 298, 299

  =Pinaceæ=                                                       =19=

  Pine                                                              19
    gray                                                   22, 23, 300
    jack                                                   22, 23, 297
    Jersey                                             22, 24, 25, 300
    Norway                                                         290
    pitch                                                          290
    scrub                                                   22, 24, 25
    short-leaf                                                     290
    white                                         20, 21, 25, 297, 300

  =Pinus=                                                         =19=
    =Banksiana=                                          =22=, 23, 300
    =echinata=                                                   =290=
    =resinosa=                                                   =290=
    =rigida=                                                     =290=
    =Strobus=                                       =20=, 21, 290, 300
    =virginiana=                                              24, =25=

  =Planera aquatica=                                             =294=

  Planer-tree                                                      294

  Plane tree                                                       168

  =Platanaceæ=                                                   =168=

  =Platanus occidentalis=                           168, 169, 298, 300

  Plum, Canada                                                218, 220
    wild goose                                                221, 222
    wild red                                             216, 217, 299
    woolly-leaf                                               218, 219

  Pond brush                                                  282, 283

  Poplar                                                       45, 159
    balsam                                                         291
    blue                                                           159
    Carolina                                                    47, 49
    hickory                                                        159
    Lombardy                                                       292
    silver-leaf                                                 45, 46
    swamp                                                           47
    white                                                          159
    yellow                                               159, 160, 298

  =Populus=                                                       =45=
    =alba=                                                    =45=, 46
    =balsamifera=                                                =291=
    _balsamifera_ variety _virginiana_                            _47_
    =candicans=                                                  =292=
    =deltoides=                                     =47=, 49, 297, 300
    =grandidentata=                            =50=, 51, 291, 297, 300
    =heterophylla=                                  =47=, 48, 297, 300
    =nigra= variety =italica=                                    =292=
    =tremuloides=                                   =52=, 53, 297, 300

  Preface                                                            7

  Privet swamp                                                     300

  =Prunus=                                                       =216=
    =americana=                                        =216=, 217, 299
    =americana= variety =lanata=                            =218=, 219
    =hortulana=                                             =221=, 222
    =nigra=                                                 =218=, 220
    =pennsylvanica=                                    =223=, 224, 300
    =serotina=                                         =223=, 225, 300


  Quaking aspen                                                52, 300

  =Quercus=                                                       =98=
    =alba=                                        =101=, 102, 297, 299
    =alba= variety =latiloba=                                    =103=
    =alba x Michauxii=                                           =110=
    =alba x Muhlenbergii=                                        =103=
    =Beadlei=                                                    =110=
    =bicolor=                                          =104=, 105, 299
    =coccinea=                                         =131=, 132, 299
    =Deami=                                                      =103=
    _digitata_                                                   _135_
    =ellipsoidalis=                                         =127=, 128
    =falcata=                                     =133=, 134, 297, 299
    =illicifolia=                                                =293=
    =imbricaria=                                       =119=, 120, 299
    =lyrata=                                           =117=, 118, 299
    =macrocarpa=                                  115, =116=, 297, 299
    =macrocarpa= variety =olivæformis=                           =116=
    =marilandica=                                 =135=, 136, 294, 299
    _maxima_                                                     _121_
    =Michauxii=                                   =107=, 108, 297, 299
    _montana_                                                    _110_
    =Muhlenbergii=                           =104=, 106, 109, 112, 293
    =nigra=                                                      =293=
    _pagoda_                                                     _135_
    _pagodaefolia_                                               _135_
    =palustris=                                   =123=, 124, 297, 299
    =Phellos=                                                    =294=
    =prinoides=                                                  =294=
    =Prinus=                                 107, =109=, 111, 294, 299
    =rubra=                                  =121=, 122, 135, 297, 299
    _rubra_ variety _triloba_                                    _135_
    =Schneckii=                                   =123=, 125, 127, 297
    _Shumardii_                                                  _126_
    _Shumardii_ variety _Schneckii_                              _126_
    =stellata=                                         =112=, 113, 300
    _triloba_                                                    _135_
    =velutina=                               =127=, 129, 131, 298, 299


  Redbud                                            227, 228, 298, 300

  Remarks, explanation of                                           15

  =Robinia Pseudo-Acacia=                              =235=, 236, 299

  _Rulac Nuttallii_                                              _242_


  =Salicaceæ=                                                     =34=

  =Salix=                                                         =34=
    =alba=                                                    =40=, 41
    =alba= variety =vitellina=                                    =40=
    =amygdaloides=                                       =38=, 39, 300
    =discolor=                                                =43=, 44
    =discolor= variety =eriocephala=                              =43=
    =fragilis=                                                =40=, 42
    =nigra=                                              =36=, 37, 300
    =nigra= variety =falcata=                                     =38=

  Sassafras                                         163, 164, 298, 300
    red                                                            163
    white                                                          163

  _Sassafras albida_ variety _glauca_                            _166_
    =officinale=                                            =163=, 164

  Sargent, C. S.                                                    16

  Service berry                                                    177

  =Simarubaceæ=                                                  =237=

  Sorrel tree                                                 263, 264

  Sour wood                                                   263, 264

  Specific gravity of some of the woods of Indiana                 299

  Stink tree                                                       237

  Sugar berry                                                      151

  Sugar, black                                                     246

  Sugar tree                                                       248

  Sycamore                                       5, 168, 169, 298, 300


  Tamarack                                                 26, 27, 300

  =Taxodium distichum=                              =28=, 31, 297, 300

  Thorn, Mrs. Ashe's                                          185, 187
    Miss Beckwith's                                           203, 205
    Judge Brown's                                             185, 187
    Chapman's Hill                                            188, 189
    Dr. Clapp's                                                    206
    cock-spur                                                 182, 183
    downy                                                          212
    Eggert's                                                  209, 210
    Fretz's                                                   203, 204
    Dr. Gattinger's                                           206, 207
    Jesup's                                                   200, 202
    large-fruited                                             185, 186
    long-spined                                               188, 190
    Marshall's                                                     182
    Newcastle                                                      182
    New-river                                                 191, 192
    pear                                                      191, 193
    red-fruited                                               212, 213
    round-leaved                                              194, 195
    scarlet                                                   209, 211
    shining                                                   197, 198
    southern                                                  196, 197
    variable                                                  197, 199
    Washington                                                214, 215
    waxy-fruited                                              206, 208

  =Thuja occidentalis=                                   =32=, 33, 300

  =Tiliaceæ=                                                     =255=

  =Tilia=                                                        =255=
    _americana_                                                  _255_
    =glabra=                                      =255=, 256, 298, 300
    =heterophylla=                                     =257=, 258, 300
    _heterophylla_ variety _Michauxii_                           _259_
    =neglecta=                                                   =259=

  =Toxylon pomiferum=                                            =155=

  Tree of Heaven                                              237, 238

  Trees, key to families occurring in Indiana                       17
    species excluded from Indiana flora                            290
    measurement of some of the largest found in Indiana            297
    terms used to define distribution of                            14

  =Tsuga canadensis=                                     =26=, 29, 300

  Tulip                                                       159, 160

  Tupelo                                                           259

  =Ulmaceæ=                                                      =137=

  Ulman, Paul                                                       15

  =Ulmus=                                                        =137=
    =alata=                                            =142=, 144, 299
    =americana=                                   =140=, 141, 298, 300
    =fulva=                                            =138=, 139, 209
    =Thomasi=                                          =142=, 143, 299


  =Viburnum prunifolium=                               =288=, 289, 299
    =rufidulum=                                                  =289=


  Walnut                                                    52, 54, 56
    black                                             54, 57, 297, 300
    white                                                       54, 55

  Williamson, L. A.                                                103

  Williamson, E. B.                                                103

  Willow                                               36, 38, 40, 300
    black                                             36, 37, 297, 300
    crack                                                       40, 42
    glaucous                                                        43
    peach-leaved                                                38, 39
    pussy                                                       43, 44
    swamp                                                           43
    white                                                       40, 41

  Wood, specific gravity of some species that occur in Indiana     299

  Wood, white                                                      159
    whittle                                                        257




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note


Footnote 46 was not indicated in the text and so was assumed to be
associated with the text associated with E. J. Hill's account of the
species _Celtis pumila_. The last three items in the key on page 36
were renumbered as "4" appeared twice. On page 287, "Dr. Jno. A. Warder"
was changed to "Dr. John A. Warder".

Formatting of the titles for the sections listed in the Table
of Contents was standardized.

Hyphenation and æ ligature use was standardized. The [oe] ligature was
converted to oe. Small captioned text was NOT converted to UPPER CASE as
that is used in the text for the Family Headers.

